The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction
       Vol. XX. No. 556., Saturday, July 7, 1832

Author: Various

Release Date: June 10, 2004 [EBook #12574]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, NO. 556 ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Allen Siddle and PG Distributed Proofreaders








THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. XX. No. 556.] SATURDAY, JULY 7, 1832. [PRICE 2d.



       *       *       *       *       *



SURREY ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS.

[Illustration: CIRCULAR BUILDING FOR LIONS, TIGERS, &c.]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF CIRCULAR BUILDING.]

[Illustration: ROCKWORK FOR BEAVERS, &c.]


SURREY ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS.

[Although the reader will scarcely fail to recognise the typographical
amendments contemplated in the Preface to our last volume, we may be
allowed to point attention to the most important change. To give our souls
"elbow-room," we have widened our columns so as to add upwards of two
pages throughout each sheet of our future volumes: that is sixteen pages
of the size of the present will be found to contain as much as eighteen
pages the size of those in our last volume. But the page has not been
widened like the citizen's back--at the expense of the corporation--or of
the public. The whole of the type is new, having been cast, as the
prospectus says, expressly for this work; its face is as brilliant as our
hopes, and so, now, with the reader's permission, Flow on thou shining
river.]

We commenced our last volume with three Vignette Views in the Surrey
Zoological Gardens. The season was then cold and ungenial, the trees
leafless; in short, it was about mid-winter, but the magic pencil of our
artist invested his scenes with all the pride of summer. Upon the present
occasion, our Engravings need not the aid of his creative fancy. The
Gardens are now

  made glorious by the summer sun

--the weather and the public are all propitious, and hundreds of gaily
dressed folks are flocking to inspect the zoological and botanical
curiosities of the place.

During the six months since our last visit, Mr. Cross has been
indefatigable. The grounds have been laid out under the superintendance of
Mr. Henry Phillips, the author of _Sylva Florifera_, and it is almost
impossible to give the reader an idea of their beauty and variety. The
avenues to the various buildings are planted with forest-trees, and each
tree and new plant has its name affixed on a tally; a botanical garden, on
a small scale, is, moreover talked of.

But we are forgetting the zoological tenants. The visiter enters by a
broad walk, beside which Parrots, Maccaws, and Cockatoos are uncaged on
perches; so that we may almost say with Montgomery:--

  The blossoms swung like blossoms on the trees.

To the right is a semicircular glazed house containing many beautiful
foreign birds, and two Boas, which, from their torpidity, appear nearly as
harmless as their shaggy namesakes that encircle many a fair neck. The
movable aviaries are too numerous to describe; but we must notice, in one
of them, a fine pair of Great Crowned Pigeons from New Guinea; their front
colour is a bright slate, as is that of their crests of fine silky
feathers. We next pass the circular Confectionary room, and reach the
curvilinear glazed building of 300 feet in diameter. (_See the Cut_.) This
has been planned by Mr. Henry Phillips; of the execution we spoke in _The
Mirror_, No. 528. There are four entrances to this well-contrived building.
Immediately within the wall, and all throughout the circle, is a channel
of water containing gold and silver fish; from the margin of which plants
are to be trained up within the glass. Next is a circular range of seats,
then a broad walk, and in the centre of the building are placed the cages
of carnivorous quadrupeds, as Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Hyaenas, &c. The
Lions are especially worth notice: they are African and Asiatic, and the
contrast between a pair from the country of the Persian Gulf with their
African neighbours, is very striking. A sleek Lynx from Persia, with its
exquisite tufted ears, and a docile Puma, will receive the distant
caresses of visiters. The fronts of the cages are ornamented with painted
rock-work, and our artist has endeavoured to convey an idea of the lordly
Lion in his embellished dwelling. The whole building is admirably
ventilated.

Another addition is an octagonal walled enclosure, the entrances to which
are surmounted by pairs of magnificent horns. Here are cages for large
birds, as the Ostrich, Emu, and Cassowary; and foreign _pecora_, as the
Llama and Camel, and a pair of Gnus of great beauty.

Next is an enclosure containing two pair of fine Pelicans, and the
solitary kennels of an Alpine and Cuban Dog: the Armadillo house, with a
pair of eight-banded inmates: near the latter a sty or cage is preparing
for Porcupines. At this extremity of the grounds, is the Deer paddock,
with about forty specimens, among which the Axis or spotted varieties are
very beautiful. We now reach a picturesque group of rock-work, (_See the
third Cut_), the lower part of which is intended for Beavers, the upper
craigs being at present occupied by Vultures and Eagles. The rock-work
consists chiefly of granite, with a few masses of the rock of Gibraltar.

Of the lake, hermitage, and boathouse we have already spoken. The long, or
rather semicircular, glazed building is now finished for the Monkeys, as
is an adjoining house for large birds of prey: here we should notice a
fine Ruppell Vulture, from Senegal, (named after Major Ruppell, the
celebrated traveller in Africa,) a chanting Falcon from Brazil, and a
white Hawk, from New Holland, the latter especially rare in this country.

Among the improvements we ought not to omit the affixing of the scientific
and popular names to the abodes of the respective animals. This is one of
the beneficial results of the honorary aid of Messrs. Swainson and Gray,
the distinguished zoologists.

By the way, there has been in these grounds a Fancy Fair with the laudable
object of aiding the funds for the repair of the Ladye Chapel of St.
Saviour's Southwark. We anxiously hope the _faire ladyes_ were successful
in their appeal to the fancy of their visiters.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE LATE MR. COLTON.

(_To the Editor_.)


Having observed in several papers and periodicals, (amongst which is _The
Mirror_, No. 553,) sketches of "the late Mr. Colton," and none of these
tending, in my opinion, to convey a correct idea of the character of this
extraordinary man; allow me to offer you a slight sketch of the latter
period of his life.

I am aware I shall be met by many with the squeamish proverb, _De mortuis
nil nisi bonum_; though I am not disposed at this moment to enter on a
discussion of the merits of this received axiom. Shakspeare tells us "The
evil that men do, lives after them."

Mr. Colton, or as he was vulgarly called, Parson Colton, arrived in Paris
in the year 1825 or 1826, from America, to which country he sailed from
England shortly previous to the murder of Weare. He was at that time in
possession of very little money; this small stock he increased by
borrowing upon the security of some valuable jewellery which he took out
from his creditors in this country. With this sum he commenced his career
as player at the public gaming-tables in Paris, more particularly that at
154 in the Palais Royal. The system upon which he played was at once bold
and original, and attended with great success. I have good authority (his
own) for stating, he was at one period a winner of upwards of L10,000. He
subsequently lost nearly half this sum, and he expended the remainder in
paintings by the ancient masters, of which, in the year 1828, he had a
splendid collection. These pictures he intended for the English market;
but in the latter part of the same year, he became unfortunate at the
gambling tables, and they were parted with by degress, the proceeds lost,
and their late owner, in a short time, reduced to beggary, or nearly so.
His last literary labour, if it is worthy of the name, was a history of
the Three Days of July, published by Galignani.

In person, Mr. Colton was ungainly; he stooped much, his gait was slovenly,
and his dress mean and dirty; the reason he assigned for not removing the
dirt that accumulated on the lower part of his trousers and upon his boots,
was that none but shoeblacks looked below the knee in so dirty a city as
Paris. As if fond of contradiction, he wore at the same time a ridiculous
superfluity of jewellery; his unwashed hands were adorned with rings, and
his shirt, which probably had not visited his _blanchisseuse_ for a
fortnight, was garnished with numerous brooches and pins of considerable
value. A heavy gold chain secured his watch in his waistcoat pocket, and
he carried two massive gold boxes, one for snuff, though he took none
himself, and the other for tobacco. His face was pale and emaciated, the
cheek bones being remarkably prominent; his left arm was considerably
contracted, as he was fond of saying, from a pistol wound received in a
duel. His habits were low; when not at the gaming house, he was to be
found in one of the lower English houses, smoking and drinking,
entertaining his pot companions, and acting what is vulgarly called, the
"king of the company." He possessed a fund of anecdote and wit, and had
his manners been more polished, and his character less exceptionable, his
society would doubtless have been much courted.

His lodgings, which were in the Palais Royal, above the Cafe Phoenix, were
particularly filthy; his bedroom, into which all visiters were shown, was
truly disgusting; though he had at the same time two sitting-rooms,
handsomely furnished, which were constantly locked, and into which he
himself perhaps did not enter once in a month. An anecdote, which he
related to me, will tend to illustrate his character and style of living.
A pair of his pantaloons became much worn in the pockets, and he took them
to a tailor to be repaired. They were brought home when he was absent, and
left below with the porter, who gave them to him on his return. The
following morning the _tailleur_ called while Colton was still in bed, for
the cash; he was shown into the bedroom by the miserable little urchin who
attended daily to light the fire, &c., and demanded in payment twenty
_sous_; this was resisted on the part of Colton as exorbitant, and the
_tailleur_, vexed at having parted with his work before payment, seized a
pair that were at the bedside, (imagining them the same that he had
stitched,) and was about to quit the room with them as security, when the
reverend gentleman, drawing a pistol from under his pillow, and presenting
it at the terrified mender of garments, swore he would favour him with the
contents unless the pantaloons were replaced: this was of course complied
with, and our indignant _tailleur_ immediately proceeded to _Monsieur le
Commissaire_, who dispatched messengers to require the attendance of the
party who had thus threatened the life of a Citizen of Paris. Colton then
explained that the pantaloons of which the plaintiff had taken possession,
were those he had worn on the preceding day, and contained cash that he
had brought from the gaming-house to the amount of nearly L2,000. He was
of course discharged on payment of the twenty _sous_ to the tailor.

Although generally considered mean, I have much pleasure in stating that I
have known him perform many acts of charity, frequently giving a dinner to
some one of his reduced countrymen, (of whom there are too many in Paris,)
and occasionally assisting them with small sums of money. It has been
stated that the dread of an operation which became necessary for a
complaint under which he laboured, was the cause of his suicide; this I
much doubt, since I have never met with a man of greater fortitude and
stronger nerve. I am rather disposed to think that the depressed state of
his finances, severing the only hold he had on his dissolute associates,
and the attention paid too often to wealth, though accompanied by vice,
having disappeared, he found himself pennyless and despised; he was
without religious consolation; his health declined, his spirits were
broken; he was, and felt himself, alone in the world, without friends and
without commiseration, and in a moment of desperation he put a period to
his reckless existence.

Your correspondent, _Enort_, has certainly viewed the sunny side of his
character; and that too I am disposed to think, with a burning glass. I
have passed many hours in his society, pleased with his wit and
epigrammatic sallies, but strive in vain to call to my recollection "the
spontaneous flow of his Latin, his quotations from the ancient and modern
poets, and his masterly and eloquent developement of every subject that
his acute intellect chose to dilate upon." His conversation was ever
_egotistical_ in the extreme: the bold assertion that his _Lacon_ was the
most clever work in the English language, was ever on his lips, and I
regret to add, obscenity and irreligion too often supplied the place of
wit or rational converse.

_Palace Row, New Road_.

W.W.

       *       *       *       *       *


KING KENULPH'S DAUGHTER.

This is little better than a versified _fact_. The outline may be found in
Sir Robert Atkyns' _History of Gloucestershire_, p. 435.


  King Kenulph he died, as kings have died,
    The will of the Lord be done;
  And he left to the care of his daughter fair,
    Queen Quendred, an infant son.
  The daughter gazed at her brother king,
    Her eye had an evil mote;
  And then she played with his yellow hair,
    And patted his infant throat;
  And then she muster'd a bloody mind,
    And whisper'd a favour'd slut,
  While patting the infant monarch's throat,
    It would not be much to cut.
  The favour'd gipsey noted the hint,
    And she thought it not amiss,
  She hied to the infant's governor,
    And gave him a loving kiss.
  The kiss of woman's a wond'rous juice,
    That poisoneth pious minds,
  It worketh more than the wrath of hell,
    And the eye of justice blinds.
  So they cut the infant monarch's throat,
    They buried him in the wood,
  The Mistress Quendred liv'd as a queen,
    And they thought the deed was good.
  Now mark, how ill is a crime conceal'd,
    Bad deeds will never accord,
  The murder never beheld at home,
    Was to light elsewhere restor'd,
  They wash'd their hands in the monarch's blood,
    And the world roll'd on the same,
  Till swift to the holy shrine at Rome,
    A fluttering dove there came.
  A dove, a peaceful, timorous bird,
    That carried a parchment scroll,
  And in letters of gold, the crime it told,
    That blasted a sister's soul.
  That fluttering dove flew round the shrine,
    Where the Pope by chance was led,
  And he let the scribbled parchment fall
    On his holiness' bald head.
  Now the Pope was very sore perplex'd,
    At the words the dove had scrawl'd,
  For he could not read the pig-squeak tongue,
    Which is now old English call'd.
  He questioned the French ambassador,
    The news of that scroll to speak.
  Who bowing observed, "it was not _French_,
    He never had learn'd the _Greek_."
  He ask'd a monk from _Byzantium_,
    A monk as fat as a tench,
  He merely remark'd "it was not _Greek_,
    He never had learn'd the _French_."
  He question'd the grave Lord Cardinal,
    He ordered the monks to pray'rs,
  The monks ne'er knew what language it was,
    When they saw it was not theirs.
  But there chanced to be an Englishman,
    At Rome, on a trading hope,
  The tale of blood and the letters gold,
    He read to the holy Pope.
  'Twas how King Kenulph an infant son,
    Bequeath'd to his daughter's care,
  And how the daughter slaughtered the son,
    It clearly mention'd where.
  Then the Pope cried, "Heaven's will be done,"
    And a loud Hosanna sung,
  The incense fumed to the lofty dome.
    Like ray-beam drapery hung.
  And they canoniz'd the holy dove,
    Like the soul of a martyr dead,
  The deed is still in the calendar,
    In capital letters red.
  Now when to Britain the tidings came
    Of her island's perish'd hope,
  The monks took hatchets to _Winchcomb Wood_,
    And they glorified the Pope.
  And after many a night of toil,
    They struck at the infant's bone,
  Beneath a tree, where an awful owl
    Was screeching a midnight groan.
  They bore the bones by the moonlight ray,
    To the convent's holy shrine,
  And from the psaltry sang a psalm,
    The psalm one hundred and nine.
  The queen, she hearken'd the pious tones,
    As they pass'd the palace by,
  It seem'd the saints and the morning stars
    Were chorussing in the sky.
  But when she hearken'd the deed was known,
    And her coming hour of strife,
  And how they had found the royal bones
    From which she had taken the life,
  She got King David's psalter book,
    And turn'd to the psalm they sung,
  And began to read it contrariwise,
    Though it blister'd on her tongue.
  And she mock'd the monkish melody,
    With a heart like boiling pitch,
  And the clouds went shudd'ring as they heard
    Like a broom beneath a witch.
  When she had gotten to verse the twelfth,
    'Twas the twelfth verse from the end,
  Her breast upheav'd a horrible groan,
    And she gave the psalm a rend.
  The lofty turret quiver'd with fear,
    The floor of the chapel shook,
  Her eyeballs fell from her burning brow,
    And blooded the psalter book.
  And thrice she groan'd and thrice she sigh'd,
    And thrice she bowed her head.
  And a heavy fall and a light'ning flash
    Was the knell of a sinner dead.
  And forth from her eyeless sockets flew
    A furious flame around,
  And blood stream'd out of her spirting mouth,
    Like water upon the ground.
  The magpie chatter'd above the corpse,
    The owl sang funeral lay,
  The twisting worm pass'd over her face,
    And it writhed and turn'd away.
  The jackdaws caw'd at the body dead,
    Expos'd on the churchyard stones,
  They wagg'd their tails in scorn of her flesh,
    And turn'd up their bills at her bones.
  The convent mastiff trotting along,
    Sniff'd hard at the mortal leaven,
  Then bristled his hair at her brimstone smell,
    And howl'd out his fears to heaven.
  Then the jackdaw screech'd his joy,
    That he spurn'd the royal feast,
  And keen'd all night to the grievous owl,
    And the howling mastiff beast.
  Loud on that night was the thunder crash,
    Sad was the voice of the wind,
  Swift was the glare of the lightning flash,
    And the whizz it left behind.
  At morn when the pious brothers came
    To give the body to ground,
  The skull, the feet, and palms of her hands
    Were all that they ever found.
  Then the holy monks with ominous shake
    Of the head, looked wond'rous sly,
  While the breeze that waved their whiten'd locks,
    Bore a pray'r for her soul on high.

P.S.

       *       *       *       *       *




SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY.


VAN DIEMEN'S LAND.


[There is a touching interest in the following narrative of the surrender
of certain tribes of the aborigines of Van Diemen's Land to the British
authorities. Some time since a war of extermination was commenced against
them by the colonists; but, happily for humanity, this atrocious attack,
which future historians may varnish over with "civilization," was a signal
failure; and the poor, simple creatures were still left to enjoy the woods
and caves and painted skins of savage life; not, however, without having
fiercely retaliated upon the colonists for the cruel treatment which they
experienced.]

The Oyster Bay and Big River tribes, the most sanguinary in the island,
have surrendered themselves to Mr. Robinson, by whose conciliatory
intervention the desirable event has been mainly brought about. On the 7th
of January, Mr. Robinson made his triumphant entry into Hobart Town with
his party of blacks, amounting in all to forty. They walked very leisurely
along the road, followed by a large pack of dogs, and were received by the
inhabitants on their entry into town with the most lively curiosity and
delight. Soon after their arrival they walked up to the Government House,
and were introduced to his Excellency, and the interview that took place
was truly interesting. They are delighted at the idea of proceeding to
Great Island, where they will enjoy peace and plenty uninterrupted. The
great susceptibility which they one and all evinced of the influence of
music when the band struck up, which Colonel Logan had purposely ordered
down, clearly showed the numerous spectators the power of this agent of
communication, even in the savage breast. After, in the greatest good
humour, and with an evident desire to make themselves agreeable, going
through various feats of their wonderful dexterity, they proceeded on
board the Swan River packet, until the Tamar is ready to proceed with them
to Great Island. The women were frightfully ornamented with human bones
hung round them in various fantastic forms, even to the rows of teeth and
skulls. Some of these were the remains of enemies, and white persons whom
they had killed, but more as the mementos of the affection which they bore
to the husband or children whom they had lost. They each carried a handful
of spears. They wore the usual kangaroo skin cloak thrown over the back or
shoulder, and thickly smeared with red ochre and grease. Their hair as
well as skin was also thickly coated with the same, the hair being
carefully dressed or formed by its help into neat little knots or globules
all round the head. One of the men has lost his arm, being the same who
about two years ago was caught in the rat trap that happened to be set in
the flour cask in Mr. Adey's stock-keeper's hut. They surrendered to Mr.
Robinson (who, however, very prudently did not take possession of them)
six stand of arms, which they had taken from the whites they had murdered,
or stolen from the huts. Three of them were ready loaded, and the muzzles
carefully stuffed with pieces of blanket, and one is the same which was so
recently borne by the late unfortunate Mr. Parker. The inside of several
of their bark huts, which Mr. Robinson entered, was very ingeniously
ornamented with rude delineations of kangaroos, emus, and other animals.
The removal of these blacks will be of essential benefit both to
themselves and the colony. The large tracts of pasture that have so long
been deserted, owing to their murderous attacks on the shepherds and the
stockhuts, will now be available, and a very sensible relief will be
afforded to the flocks of sheep that had been withdrawn from them, and
pent up on inadequate ranges of pasture--a circumstance which indeed has
tended materially to impoverish the flocks and keep up the price of
butcher's meat.

The dogs which these poor people have nursed and bred up in order to
assist them in hunting the kangaroo, have latterly become so numerous and
wild as to be a very serious and alarming nuisance to the settlers,
committing on many farms nightly ravages on their flocks. In the
neighbourhood of Benlomond they are particularly troublesome, and
are so wild and savage as to set even men at defiance. Notwithstanding
this, however, the numbers of the kangaroo seem daily and rapidly to
increase. Whether this arises from the latterly diminished slaughter among
them, owing to the decrease of the blacks who formerly fed upon them, or
from the effects of the Dog Act, which induced many to destroy their dogs
and to desist from the chase, or from the relish which the animal itself
has acquired for the corn and other artificial food it finds upon the
cultivated farms, we cannot say, but certain it is, that not only patches,
but whole acres of corn in many situations are this year destroyed by
their nightly inroads, coming as they do in droves of fifties and hundreds.
As an instance we may mention that on Mr. Gunn's farm at the Coal River
alone, a fine field of five acres of wheat has lately been completely
eaten down by them. Many persons are in consequence falling on the
expedient of catching them in wires and pitfalls in order to diminish them.

The ravages committed by the opossums, in like manner, are almost equally
ruinous to the hopes of the farmer, in addition to the attacks of
bandicoots, kangaroo rats, and the other almost innumerable (and certainly
as yet unknown to naturalists) species of small quadrupeds that every
where inhabit the wild bush and underwood of this island. Mr. Nicholas, of
the Clyde, accompanied by his servant, lately, in the course of half a
dozen evenings, and within the range of a moderate-sized field, killed no
less than 340 of these opussums in the immediate vicinity of his own house.

[The beneficial result of this surrender need not be explained. The lives
and properties of the settlers will now be secure, and the wild natives
become useful members of society. The passing of man from the opposite
states of barbarism and civilization is one of the most pathetic episodes
in the drama of human life. In the _Morning Herald_, where we find the
above extract from a recent _Hobart Town Courier_, it is pertinently
observed, "When we find one of those natives of Van Diemen's Land had lost
an arm which had been torn off in a trap, and that the wound was healed,
the question naturally suggests itself, after all that we have heard of
late about 'anatomical science,' what is the science of the wilderness
that performed such a cure?" We fear it will puzzle the heads of all the
colleges in Europe to solve this problem.]

       *       *       *       *       *



THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.


LORD BYRON.


[The _New Monthly Magazine_ promises an abundance of light, summer reading
in Lady Blessington's Conversations with Lord Byron. They are of that gay,
jaunty character which editors, booksellers, and readers think so
peculiarly adapted for the season. Here are a few specimens:]


JOURNAL OF CONVERSATIONS WITH LORD BYRON.

_By the Countess of Blessington._

*** Our readers will recollect those letters in the second volume of
Moore's Byron, addressed to Lady B----, which confer such additional value
on that work. The whole of the journal, in which those letters, given by
Lady B---- to Mr. Moore, were entered, (and which journal was never shown
to Mr. Moore, nor indeed till now confided to any one,) is in our hands,
and will appear, from time to time, in the _New Monthly_, till concluded.
It is full of the most varied interest, and we believe that it will be
found to convey at least as natural and unexaggerated an account of Lord
Byron's character as has yet been presented to the public.

_Genoa, April 1st_, 1823.--Saw Lord Byron for the first time. The
impression for the first few minutes disappointed me, as I had, both from
the portraits and descriptions given, conceived a different idea of him. I
had fancied him taller, with a more dignified and commanding air; and I
looked in vain for the hero-looking sort of person with whom I had so long
identified him in imagination. His appearance is, however, highly
prepossessing; his head is finely shaped, and the forehead open, high, and
noble; his eyes are grey and full of expression, but one is visibly larger
than the other; the nose is large and well shaped, but from being a little
_too thick_, it looks better in profile than in front-face: his mouth is
the most remarkable feature in his face, the upper lip of Grecian
shortness, and the corners descending; the lips full, and finely cut. In
speaking, he shows his teeth very much, and they are white and even; but I
observed that even in his smile--and he smiles frequently--there is
something of a scornful expression in his mouth that is evidently natural,
and not, as many suppose, affected. This particularly struck me. His chin
is large and well shaped, and finishes well the oval of his face. He is
extremely thin, indeed so much so that his figure has almost a boyish air;
his face is peculiarly pale, but not the paleness of ill-health, as its
character is that of fairness, the fairness of a dark-haired person--and
his hair (which is getting rapidly grey) is of a very dark brown, and
curls naturally: he uses a good deal of oil in it, which makes it look
still darker. His countenance is full of expression, and changes with the
subject of conversation; it gains on the beholder the more it is seen, and
leaves an agreeable impression. I should say that melancholy was its
prevailing character, as I observed that when any observation elicited a
smile--and they were many, as the conversation was gay and playful--it
appeared to linger but for a moment on his lip, which instantly resumed
its former expression of seriousness. His whole appearance is remarkably
gentlemanlike, and he owes nothing of this to his toilette, as his coat
appears to have been many years made, is much too large--and all his
garments convey the idea of having been purchased ready made, so ill do
they fit him. There is a _gaucherie_ in his movements, which evidently
proceeds from the perpetual consciousness of his lameness, that appears to
haunt him; for he tries to conceal his foot when seated, and when walking,
has a nervous rapidity in his manner. He is very slightly lame, and the
deformity of his foot is so little remarkable that I am not now aware
which foot it is. His voice and accent are peculiarly agreeable, but
effeminate--clear, harmonious, and so distinct, that though his general
tone in speaking is rather low than high, not a word is lost. His manners
are as unlike my preconceived notions of them as is his appearance. I had
expected to find him a dignified, cold, reserved, and haughty person,
resembling those mysterious personages he so loves to paint in his works,
and with whom he has been so often identified by the good-natured world;
but nothing can be more different; for were I to point out the prominent
defect of Lord Byron, I should say it was flippancy, and a total want of
that natural self-possession and dignity which ought to characterize a man
of birth and education.

_April 2nd_.--We had scarcely finished our _dejeune a la fourchette_ this
day when Lord Byron was announced: he sent up two printed cards, in an
envelope addressed to us, and soon followed them. He appeared still more
gay and cheerful than the day before--made various inquiries about all our
mutual friends in England--spoke of them with affectionate interest, mixed
with a badinage in which none of their little defects were spared; indeed
candour obliges me to own that their defects seemed to have made a deeper
impression on his mind than their good qualities (though he allowed all
the latter) by the _gusto_ with which he entered into them.

He talked of our mutual friend Moore, and of his _Lalla Rookh_, which he
said, though very beautiful, had disappointed him, adding, that Moore
would go down to posterity by his _Melodies_, which were all perfect. He
said that he had never been so much _affected_ as on hearing Moore sing
some of them, particularly "When first I met Thee," which, he said, made
him shed tears: "But," added he, with a look full of archness, "it was
after I had drunk a certain portion of very potent white brandy." As he
laid a peculiar stress on the word _affected_, I smiled, and the sequel of
the white brandy made me smile again: he asked me the cause, and I
answered that his observation reminded me of the story of a lady offering
her condolence to a poor Irishwoman on the death of her child, who stated
that she had never been more affected than on the event; the poor woman,
knowing the hollowness of the compliment, answered with all the quickness
of her country, "Sure, then, Ma'am, that is saying a great deal, for you
were always affected." Lord Byron laughed, and said my _apropos_ was very
wicked--but I maintained it was very just. He spoke much more warmly of
Moore's social attractions as a companion, which he said were unrivalled,
than of his merits as a poet.

When Lord Byron came to dine with us on Thursday, he arrived an hour
before the usual time, and appeared in good spirits. He said that he found
the passages and stairs filled with people, who stared at him very much;
but he did not seem vexed at this homage, for so it certainly was meant,
as the Albergo della Ville, where we resided, being filled with English,
all were curious to see their distinguished countryman. He was very gay at
dinner, ate of most of the dishes, expressed pleasure at partaking of a
plum pudding, _a l'Anglaise_, made by one of our English servants; was
helped twice, and observed, that he hoped he should not shock us by eating
so much: "But," added he, "the truth is, that for several months I have
been following a most abstemious _regime_, living almost entirely on
vegetables; and now that I see a good dinner, I cannot resist temptation,
though to-morrow I shall suffer for my gormandize, as I always do when I
indulge in luxuries." He drank three glasses of champagne, saying, that as
he considered it a _jour de fete_, he would eat, drink, and be merry.

He talked of Mr. ----, who was then our Minister at Genoa. "H----," said
he, "is a thorough good-natured and hospitable man, keeps an excellent
table, and is as fond of good things as I am, but has not my forbearance.
I received, some time ago, a _Pate de Perigord_, and finding it excellent,
I determined on sharing it with H----; but here my natural selfishness
suggested that it would be wiser for me, who had so few dainties, to keep
this for myself, than to give it to H----, who had so many. After half an
hour's debate between selfishness and generosity, which do you think"
(turning to me) "carried the point?"--I answered, "Generosity, of
course."--"No, by Jove!" said he, "no such thing; selfishness in this case,
as in most others, triumphed; I sent the _pate_ to my friend H----,
because I felt another dinner off it would play the deuce with me; and so
you see, after all, he owed the _pate_ more to selfishness than
generosity." Seeing us smile at this, he said:--"When you know me better,
you will find that I am the most selfish person in the world; I have,
however, the merit, if it be one, of not only being perfectly conscious of
my faults, but of never denying them; and this surely is something, in
this age of cant and hypocrisy."

In all his conversations relative to Lady Byron, and they are frequent, he
declares that he is totally unconscious of the cause of her leaving him,
but suspects that the illnatured interposition of Mrs. Charlemont led to
it. It is a strange business! He declares that he left no means untried to
effect a reconciliation, and always adds with bitterness, "A day will
arrive when I shall be avenged. I feel that I shall not live long, and
when the grave has closed over me, what must she feel?" All who wish well
to Lady Byron must desire that she should not survive her husband, for the
all-atoning grave that gives oblivion to the errors of the dead, clothes
those of the living in such sombre colours to their own too-late awakened
feelings, as to render them wretched for life, and more than avenges the
real, or imagined wrongs of those we have lost for ever.

When Lord Byron was praising the mental and personal qualifications of
Lady Byron, I asked him how all that he now said agreed with certain
sarcasms supposed to bear a reference to her, in his works. He smiled,
shook his head, and said they were meant to spite and vex her, when he was
wounded and irritated at her refusing to receive or answer his letters;
that he was not sincere in his implied censures, and that he was sorry he
had written them; but notwithstanding this regret, and all his good
resolutions to avoid similar sins, he might on renewed provocation recur
to the same vengeance, though he allowed it was petty and unworthy of him.
Lord Byron speaks of his sister, Mrs. Leigh, constantly, and always with
strong expressions of affection; he says she is the most faultless person
he ever knew, and that she was his only source of consolation in his
troubles on the separation.

Byron is a great talker, his flippancy ceases in a _tete-a-tete_, and he
becomes sententious, abandoning himself to the subject and seeming to
think aloud, though his language has the appearance of stiffness, and is
quite opposed to the trifling chit-chat that he enters into when in
general society. I attribute this to his having lived so much alone, as
also to the desire he now professes of applying himself to prose writing.
He affects a sort of Johnsonian tone, likes very much to be listened to,
and seems to observe the effect he produces on his hearer. In mixed
society his ambition is to appear the man of fashion, he adopts a light
tone of badinage and persiflage that does not sit gracefully on him, but
is always anxious to turn the subject to his own personal affairs, or
feelings, which are either lamented with an air of melancholy, or dwelt on
with playful ridicule, according to the humour he happens to be in.

Byron has remarkable penetration in discovering the characters of those
around him, and he piques himself extremely on it: he also thinks he has
fathomed the recesses of his own mind; but he is mistaken: with much that
is _little_ (which he suspects) in his character, there is much that is
great, that he does not give himself credit for: his first impulses are
always good, but his temper, which is impatient, prevents his acting on
the cool dictates of reason; and it appears to me, that in judging himself,
Byron mistakes temper for character, and takes the ebullitions of the
first, for the indications of the nature of the second. He declares, that
in addition to his other failings, avarice is now established. This new
vice, like all the others, he attributes to himself, he talks of as one
would name those of an acquaintance, in a sort of deprecating, yet half
mocking tone; as much as to say, you see I know all my faults better than
you do, though I don't choose to correct them: indeed, it has often
occurred to me, that he brings forward his defects, as if in anticipation
of some one else exposing them, which he would not like; as though he
affects the contrary, he is jealous of being found fault with, and shows
it in a thousand ways.

He affects to dislike hearing his works praised or referred to; I say
affects, because I am sure it is not real or natural; as he who loves
praise, as Byron evidently does, in other things, cannot dislike it for
that in which he must be conscious it is deserved. He refers to his feats
in horsemanship, shooting at a mark, and swimming, in a way that proves he
likes to be complimented on them; and nothing appears to give him more
satisfaction than being considered a man of fashion, who had great success
in fashionable society in London, when he resided there. He is peculiarly
compassionate to the poor; I remarked that he rarely, in our rides, passed
a mendicant without giving him charity, which was invariably bestowed with
gentleness and kindness; this was still more observable if the person was
deformed, as if he sympathized with the object.

Byron is very fond of gossiping, and of hearing what is going on in the
London fashionable world; his friends keep him _au courant_, and any
little scandal amuses him very much. I observed this to him one day, and
added, that I thought his mind had been too great to descend to such
trifles! he laughed and said with mock gravity, "Don't you know that the
trunk of an elephant that can lift the most ponderous weights, disdains
not to take up the most minute? This is the case with my _great_ mind,
(laughing anew,) and you must allow the simile is worthy the subject.
Jesting apart, I do like a little scandal--I believe all English people do.
An Italian lady, Madame Benzoni, talking to me on the prevalence of this
taste among my compatriots, observed, that when she first knew the English,
she thought them the most spiteful and ill-natured people in the world,
from hearing them constantly repeating evil of each other; but having seen
various amiable traits in their characters, she had arrived at the
conclusion, that they were not naturally _mechant_; but that living in a
country like England, where severity of morals punishes so heavily any
dereliction from propriety, each individual, to prove personal correctness,
was compelled to attack the _sins_ of his or her acquaintance, as it
furnished an opportunity of expressing their abhorrence by words, instead
of proving it by actions, which might cause some self-denial to themselves.
This," said Byron, "was an ingenious, as well as charitable supposition;
and we must all allow that it is infinitely more easy to decry and expose
the sins of others, than to correct our own; and many find the first so
agreeable an occupation, that it precludes the second--this, at least, is
my case."

"The Italians do not understand the English," said Byron; "indeed, how can
they? for they (the Italians) are frank, simple, and open in their natures,
following the bent of their inclinations, which they do not believe to be
wicked; while the English, to conceal the indulgence of theirs, daily
practise hypocrisy, falsehood, and uncharitableness; so that to _one_
error is added many crimes." Byron had now got on a favourite subject, and
went on decrying hypocrisy and cant, mingling sarcasms and bitter
observations on the false delicacy of the English. It is strange, but true
as strange, that he could not, or at least did not, distinguish the
distinction between cause and effect, in this case. The respect for virtue
will always cause spurious imitations of it to be given; and what he calls
hypocrisy, is but the respect to public opinion that induces people, who
have not courage to correct their errors, at least to endeavour to conceal
them; and Cant is the homage that Vice pays to Virtue.[1] We do not value
the diamond less, because there are so many worthless imitations of it,
and Goodness loses nothing of her intrinsic value because so many wish to
be thought to possess it. That nation may be considered to possess the
most virtue, where it is the most highly appreciated; and that the least,
where it is so little understood, that the semblance is not even assumed.

Byron is, I believe, sincere in his belief in supernatural appearances; he
assumes a grave and mysterious air when he talks on the subject, which he
is fond of doing, and has told me some extraordinary stories relative to
Mr. Shelley, who, he assures me, had an implicit belief in ghosts. He also
told me that Mr. Shelley's spectre had appeared to a lady, walking in a
garden, and he seemed to lay great stress on this. Though some of the
wisest of mankind, as witness Johnson, shared this weakness in common with
Byron; still there is something so unusual in our matter-of-fact days in
giving way to it, that I was at first doubtful that Byron was serious in
his belief. He is also superstitious about days, and other trifling
things,--believes in lucky and unlucky days,--dislikes undertaking any
thing on a Friday, helping or being helped to salt at table, spilling salt
or oil, letting bread fall, and breaking mirrors; in short, he gives way
to a thousand fantastical notions, that prove that even _l'esprit le plus
fort_ has its weak side.


    [1] Rouchefoucault.

       *       *       *       *       *


ODE TO THE GERMANS.

BY THOMAS CAMPBELL, ESQ.


  The Spirit of Britannia
    Invokes across the main,
  Her sister Allemania
    To burst the Tyrant's chain;
  By our kindred blood she cries,
  Rise Allemanians, rise,
    And hallowed thrice the band
  Of our kindred hearts shall be,
    When your land shall be the land
                    Of the free--of the free!

  With Freedom's lion-banner
    Britannia rules the waves
  Whilst your BROAD STONE OF HONOUR[2]
    Is still the camp of slaves.
  For shame, for glory's sake,
  Wake, Allemanians, wake,
    And the tyrants now that whelm
  Half the world, shall quail and flee,
    When your realm shall be the realm
                    Of the free--of the free!

  Mars owes to you his thunder[3]
    That shakes the battle-field,
  Yet to break your bonds asunder
    No martial bolt has peal'd.
  Shall the laurell'd land of Art
  Wear shackles on her heart?
    No! the clock ye framed to tell
  By its sound, the march of time,
    Let it clang Oppression's knell
            O'er your clime--o'er your clime!

  The Press's magic letters
    That blessing ye brought forth,
  Behold! it lies in fetters
    On the soil that gave it birth:
  But the trumpet must be heard
  And the charger must be spurr'd;
    For your father Armin's Sprite
  Calls down from heaven, that ye
    Shall gird you for the fight
                    And be free!--and be free!


_Metropolitan._


    [2] Ehrenbreitstein, signifies in German, "_the broad stone of
        honour_."

    [3] Germany invented gunpowder, clock-making, and printing.

       *       *       *       *       *


GAZEL.

BY THOMAS MOORE, ESQ.


  Haste, Maami, the spring is nigh,
    Already, in th' unopened flowers
  That sleep around us, Fancy's eye
    Can see the blush of future bowers;
  And joy it brings to thee and me,
  My own beloved Maami!

  The streamlet, frozen on its way,
    To feed the marble Founts of Kings,
  Now, loosen'd by the vernal ray,
    Upon its path exulting springs,
  As doth this bounding heart to thee,
  My ever blissful Maami!

  Such bright hours were not made to stay,
    Enough if they awhile remain;
  Like Irem's bowers, that fade away,
    From time to time, and come again,
  And life shall all one Irem be
  For us, my gentle Maami.

  O haste, for this impatient heart
    Is like the rose in Yemen's vale,
  That rends its inmost leaves apart
    With passion for the nightingale;
  So languishes this soul for thee,
    My bright and blushing Maami!


_Metropolitan_.

       *       *       *       *       *



NOTES OF A READER.


ADVICE, BY A MAN OF THE WORLD.

[We quoted _Contarini Fleming_ in our last volume, but were silent on its
character. It is purely metaphysical, and metaphysics, at this season, may
be "like pork in the dog-days;" but there are certain portions which
strike out ideas so forcibly, and illustrate the _communia_ of life with
such vigour, as to tempt any lounging reader. Contarini is stated to be Mr.
D'Israeli, the younger--Vivian Grey and the Young Duke,--with much more of
the crust and wing of age and experience than was found in either of the
fashionable novels. The real charm of Contarini is in its abstractedness,
and consists in being pleased and puzzled at the same moment. The
embellishment which the playful genius of the writer has gracefully, not
tawdrily, thrown over his pages will attract, but the main purpose and
merit of the work lies in its undercurrents, or, rather it would consist
in this feature if the judgment of the writer were still more matured.
Perhaps Mr. D'Israeli, who began the world of letters as a writer of
fashionable novels, may leave us a work on metaphysics.

In the opening chapter of Contarini Fleming, Mr. D'Israeli explains his
object as follows:--]

I am desirous of writing a book which shall be all truth, a work of which
the passion, the thought, the action, and even the style, should spring
from my own experience of feeling, from the meditations of my own
intellect, from my own observation of incident, from my own study of the
genius of expression.

[We can only admit a passage which appears to us to contain much
world-knowledge and wholesome experience--what half the coroneted heads in
Europe lack most lamentably. It is the advice tendered to Contarini by his
father, previous to the youth of promise repairing to the University:]

I wish you to mix as much as is convenient with society. I apprehend that
you have, perhaps, hitherto indulged a little too much in lonely habits.
Young men are apt to get a little abstracted, and occasionally to think
that there is something singular in their nature, when the fact is, if
they were better acquainted with their fellow creatures, they would find
they were mistaken. This is a common error, indeed the commonest. I am not
at all surprised that you have fallen into it. All have. The most
practical business-like men that exist have many of them, when children,
conceived themselves totally disqualified to struggle in the world. You
may rest assured of this. I could mention many remarkable instances. All
persons, when young, are fond of solitude, and, when they are beginning to
think, are sometimes surprised at their own thoughts. There is nothing to
be deplored, scarcely to be feared, in this. It almost always wears off;
but sometimes it happens, that they have not judicious friends by them to
explain, that the habits which they think peculiar are universal, and, if
unreasonably indulged, can ultimately only turn them into indolent,
insignificant members of society, and occasion them lasting unhappiness.

But to enter society with pleasure, you must be qualified for it. I think
it quite time for you to make yourself master of some accomplishments.
Decidedly you should make yourself a good dancer. Without dancing, you can
never attain a perfectly graceful carriage, which is of the highest
importance in life, and should be every man's ambition. You are yet too
young fully to comprehend, how much in life depends upon manner. Whenever
you see a man, who is successful in society, try to discover what makes
him pleasing, and, if possible, adopt his system. You should learn to
fence. For languages, at present, French will be sufficient. You speak it
fairly: try to speak it elegantly. Read French authors. Read
Rouchefoucault. The French writers are the finest in the world, for they
clear our heads of ridiculous ideas. Study precision.

Do not talk too much at present, do not _try_ to talk. But whenever you
speak, speak with self-possession. Speak in a subdued tone, and always
look at the person whom you are addressing. Before one can engage in
general conversation with any effect, there is a certain acquaintance with
trifling, but amusing subjects, which must be first attained. You will
soon pick up sufficient by listening and observing. Never argue. In
society, nothing must be discussed: give only results. If any person
differ with you--bow and turn the conversation. In society, never
think--always be on the watch, or you will miss many opportunities, and
say many disagreeable things.

Talk to women, talk to women as much as you can. This is the best school.
This is the way to gain fluency--because you need not care what you say,
and had better not be sensible. They too will rally you on many points,
and, as they are women, you will not be offended. Nothing is of so much
importance, and of so much use, to a young man entering life, as to be
well criticised by women. It is impossible to get rid of those thousand
bad habits, which we pick up in boyhood, without this supervision.
Unfortunately, you have no sisters. But never be offended if a woman rally
you. Encourage her. Otherwise, you will never be free from your
awkwardness, or any little oddities, and certainly never learn to dress.

You ride pretty well, but you had better go through the manege. Every
gentleman should be a perfect cavalier.

As you are to be at home for so short a time, and for other reasons, I
think it better that you should not have a tutor in the house. Parcel out
your morning, then, for your separate masters. Rise early and regularly,
and read for three hours. Read the Memoirs of the Cardinal de Retz--the
Life of Richelieu--everything about Napoleon,--read works of that kind.
Read no history: nothing but biography, for that is life without theory.
Then fence. Talk an hour with your French master, but do not throw the
burden of the conversation upon him. Give him an account of something.
Describe to him the events of yesterday, or give him a detailed account of
the constitution. You will have then sufficiently rested yourself for your
dancing. And after that ride and amuse yourself as much as you can.
Amusement to an observing mind is study.

I pursued the system which my father had pointed out, with exactness, and
soon with pleasure. I sacredly observed my hours of reading, and devoted
myself to the study of the lives of what my father considered really great
men--that is to say, men of great energies, and violent volition, who look
upon their fellow creatures as mere tools, with which they can build up a
pedestal for their solitary statue, and who sacrifice every feeling which
should sway humanity, and every high work which genius should really
achieve, to the short-sighted gratification of an irrational and
outrageous selfism. As for my manners, I flattered myself that they
advanced in measure with my mind, although I already emulated Napoleon. I
soon overcame the fear which attended my first experiments in society, and
by scrupulously observing the paternal maxims, I soon became very
self-satisfied. I listened to men with a delightful mixture of defference
and self-confidence: were they old, and did I differ with them, I
contented myself by positively stating my opinion in a most subdued voice,
and then either turning the subject, or turning upon my heel. But as for
women, it is astonishing how well I got on. The nervous rapidity of my
first rattle soon subsided into a continuous flow of easy nonsense.
Impertinent and flippant, I was universally hailed an original and a wit.
But the most remarkable incident was, that the baroness and myself became
the greatest friends. I was her constant attendant, and rehearsed to her
flattered ear all my evening performance. She was the person with whom I
practised, and as she had a taste in dress, I encouraged her opinions.
Unconscious that she was at once my lay figure and my mirror, she loaded
me with presents, and announced to all her coterie, that I was the most
delightful young man of her acquaintance.

From all this it may easily be suspected, that at the age of fifteen I had
unexpectedly become one of the most affected, conceited, and intolerable
atoms that ever peopled the sunbeam of society.

       *       *       *       *       *


[This gem is from a volume of Songs and other small Poems, by Barry
Cornwall. It is one of the prettiest poetical _bijoux_ of the season, and
shall receive more attention in our next.]

PETITION TO TIME.


  Touch us gently, Time!
    Let us glide adown thy stream
  Gently,--as we sometimes glide
    Through a quiet dream!
  Humble voyagers are We,
  Husband, wife, and children three--
  (One is lost,--an angel, fled
  To the azure overhead!)

  Touch us gently, Time!
    We've not proud nor soaring wings:
  _Our_ ambition, _our_ content
    Lies in simple things.
  Humble voyagers are We,
  O'er Life's dim unsounded sea,
  Seeking only some calm clime:--
  Touch us _gently_, gentle Time!

       *       *       *       *       *


THE SPIRIT OF SONG-WRITING.

Song-writing is the most difficult species of poetry; failure is not to be
recovered--one slip ruins the whole attempt. A good song is a little piece
of perfection, and perfection does not grow in every field. There must be
felicity of idea, lightness of tone, exquisiteness or extreme naturalness
and propriety of expression; and this within the compass of a few verses.
And this is not all; the writer must betray a sustained tone of enthusiasm:
the song should have neither beginning nor end,--it must seem a snatch
from out of a continuous strain of melody--something that swells upon the
ear, as if the previous parts had been unheard, and which dies away as if
the air had carried its notes afar, and the sounds were wafted along to
other lands. Men of genius are now and then born song-writers; such were
Horace and Burns, such is Beranger. England has not had hers yet, and
perhaps never may have. Englishmen are not nationally calculated to make
song-writers; but individual genius makes light of running counter to a
whole nation of habits, and there is no saying that we may not have our
true lyricist yet. Song-writing is most likely to spring up among people
greatly susceptible of the charms of music, and inventive of airs which,
by some peculiar charm they possess, spread over all the country, sink
deep in the memory, and come spontaneously on the thoughts in moments of
sadness or joy, and, in short, become what are called national. National
songs go with national airs, and spring up with circumstances. The English
have few native airs, and as few native songs of any excellence. When an
Englishman is in love, does he sing? In camp, what wretched braying goes
by that name! at table, what have we of the generous, jovial sort?
Generally speaking, our table songs--always excepting our glees--are
pieces of bald sentiment, when they are English; but more generally, they
are borrowed from the Scotch, the Irish, and other national song-writers.
Gaiety, and that gaiety showing itself musically, is not _English_: when
we are poetically given, it is in the sad piping strain of the forlorn,
deserted, or hopeless lover. Gaiety is not English: we can be sentimental,
tender, witty, pretty, pompous, and glorious in our songs; but we ever
want the essential quality of gaiety--gaiety of heart--the dancing life of
the spirit, that makes the voice hum, the fingers crack merrily, and the
feet fidget restlessly on the ground.--_Spectator Newspaper_.

       *       *       *       *       *


LORD BYRON'S EARLY POEMS.


[The following specimens are from the Seventh Volume of the elegant
Edition of Lord Byron's Life and Works, now in the course of publication,
under the editorship of Mr. Moore:]


THE ADIEU.

_Written under the impression that the Author would soon die._


  Adieu, thou hill![4] where early joy
    Spread roses o'er my brow;
  Where science seeks each loitering boy
    With knowledge to endow.
  Adieu, my youthful friends or foes,
  Partners of former bliss or woes;
    No more through Ida's path we stray;
  Soon must I share the gloomy cell,
  Whose ever-slumbering inmates dwell
    Unconscious of the day.

  Adieu, ye hoary Regal Fanes,
    Ye spires of Granta's vale,
  Where learning robed in sable reigns,
    And melancholy pale.
  Ye comrades of the jovial hour,
  Ye tenants of the classic bower,
    On Cama's verdant margin placed,
  Adieu! while memory still is mine,
  For offerings on oblivion's shrine,
    These scenes must be effaced.

  Adieu, ye mountains of the clime,
    Where grew my youthful years;
  Where Loch na Garr in snows sublime
    His giant summit rears.
  Why did my childhood wander forth
  From you, ye regions of the North,
    With sons of pride to roam?
  Why did I quit my Highland cave,
  Marr's dusky heath, and Dee's clear wave,
    To seek a Sotheron home?

  Hall of my sires! a long farewell;
    Yet why to thee adieu?
  Thy vaults will echo back my knell,
    Thy towers my tomb will view;
  The faltering tongue which sung thy fall,
  And former glories of thy hall
    Forgets its wonted simple note;
  But yet the lyre retains the strings,
  And sometimes on Aeolian wings,
    In dying strains may float.

  Fields, which surround yon rustic cot,
    While yet I linger here,
  Adieu! you are not now forgot,
    To retrospection dear.
  Streamlet[5] along whose rippling surge,
  My youthful limbs were wont to urge
    At noontide heat their pliant course;
  Plunging with ardour from the shore,
  Thy springs will lave these limbs no more,
    Deprived of active force.

  And shall I here forget the scene,
    Still nearest to my breast?
  Rocks rise, and rivers roll between
    The spot which passion blest;
  Yet, Mary,[6] all thy beauties seem
  Fresh as in Love's bewitching dream,
    To me in smiles display'd:
  Till slow disease resigns his prey
  To Death, the parent of decay,
    Thine image cannot fade.

  And thou, my friend![7] whose gentle love
    Yet thrills my bosom's chords,
  How much thy friendship was above
    Description's power of words!
  Still near my breast thy gift I wear,
  Which sparkled once with feeling's tear.
    Of Love, the pure, the sacred gem;
  Our souls were equal, and our lot
  In that dear moment quite forgot;
    Let Pride alone condemn!

  All, all is dark and cheerless now!
    No smile of Love's deceit
  Can warm my veins with wonted glow,
    Can bid Life's pulses beat:
  Not e'en the hope of future fame
  Can wake my faint, exhausted frame.
    Or crown with fancied wreaths my head.
  Mine is a short inglorious race,
  To humble in the dust my face,
    And mingle with the dead.

  Oh Fame! thou goddess of my heart:
    On him who gains thy praise,
  Pointless must fall the Spectre's dart,
    Consumed in glory's blaze;
  But me she beckons from the earth,
  My name obscure, unmark'd my birth,
    My life a short and vulgar dream:
  Lost in the dull, ignoble crowd,
  My hopes recline within a shroud,
    My fate is Lethe's stream.

  When I repose beneath the sod,
    Unheeded in the clay,
  Where once my playful footsteps trod,
    Where now my head must lay;
  The meed of pity will be shed
  In dew-drops o'er my narrow bed,
    By nightly skies and storms alone;
  No mortal eye will deign to steep
  With tears the dark sepulchral deep
    Which hides a name unknown.

  Forget this world, my restless sprite,
    Turn, turn thy thoughts to Heaven;
  There must thou soon direct thy flight,
    If errors are forgiven,
  To bigots and to sects unknown,
  Bow down beneath the Almighty's Throne;
    To Him address thy trembling prayer:
  He who is merciful and just,
  Will not reject a child of dust,
    Although his meanest care.

  Father of Light! to Thee I call,
    My soul is dark within;
  Thou, who canst mark the sparrow's fall,
    Avert the death of sin.
  Thou, who canst guide the wandering star,
  Who calms't the elemental war,
    Whose mantle is yon boundless sky,
  My thoughts, my words, my crimes forgive;
  And, since I soon must cease to live,
    Instruct me how to die.

1807. [Now first published.]


    [4] Harrow.

    [5] The river Grete at Southwell.

    [6] Mary Duff.

    [7] Eddlestone, the Cambridge chorister.


FAREWELL TO THE MUSE.


  Thou power! who hast ruled me through infancy's days,
    Young offspring of Fancy, 'tis time we should part,
  Then rise on the gale this the last of my lays,
    The coldest effusion which springs from my heart.

  This bosom, responsive to rapture no more,
    Shall hush thy wild notes, nor implore thee to sing;
  The feelings of childhood, which taught thee to soar,
    Are wafted far distant on Apathy's wing.

  Though simple the themes of my rude flowing lyre,
    Yet even these themes are departed for ever;
  No more beam the eyes which my dream could inspire,
    My visions are flown, to return--alas, never!

  When drain'd is the nectar which gladdens the bowl,
    How vain is the effort delight to prolong!
  When cold is the beauty which dwelt in my soul,
    What magic of Fancy can lengthen my song?

  Can the lips sing of Love in the desert alone,
    Of kisses and smiles which they now must resign?
  Or dwell with delight on the hours that are flown?
    Ah, no! for those hours can no longer be mine.

  Can they speak of the friends that I lived but to love?
    Ah, surely affection ennobles the strain!
  But how can my numbers in sympathy move,
    When I scarcely can hope to behold them again?

  Can I sing of the deeds which my Fathers have done,
    And raise my loud harp to the fame of my sires?
  For glories like theirs, oh, how faint is my tone!
    For Heroes' exploits how unequal my fires!

  Untouch'd, then, my lyre shall reply to the blast;
    'Tis hush'd; and my feeble endeavours are o'er;
  And those who have heard it will pardon the past,
    When they know that its murmurs shall vibrate no more.

  And soon shall its wild erring notes be forgot,
    Since early affection and love is o'ercast:
  Oh! blest had my fate been, and happy my lot,
    Had the first strain of love been the dearest, the last.

  Farewell, my young Muse! since we now can ne'er meet;
    If our songs have been languid, they surely are few:
  Let us hope that the present at least will be sweet;
    The present--which seals our eternal Adieu.

1807. [Now first published.]

       *       *       *       *       *



RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS

FUNERAL OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR.


The death of William, almost every reader knows, was occasioned by a hurt
in the belly from the pummel of his saddle, while reducing the town of
Mantes to ashes, at Rouen on Sep. 9, 1086, in the 63rd year of his age and
21st of his reign.

The king's decease was the signal for general consternation throughout the
metropolis of Normandy. The citizens, panic struck, ran to and fro as if
intoxicated, or as if the town were upon the point of being taken by
assault. Each asked counsel of his neighbour, and each anxiously turned
his thoughts to the concealing of his property. When the alarm had in some
measure subsided, the monks and clergy made a solemn procession to the
abbey of St. George, where they offered their prayers for the repose of
the soul of the departed duke: and Archbishop William commanded that the
body should be carried to Caen, to be interred in the church of St.
Stephen, which William had founded. But the lifeless king was now deserted
by all who had participated in his bounty. Every one of his brethren and
relations had left him; nor was there even a servant to be found to
perform the last offices to his departed lord. The care of the obsequies
was finally undertaken by Herluin, a knight of that district, who, moved
by the love of God and the honour of his nation, provided at his own
expense, embalmers and bearers, and a hearse, and conveyed the corpse to
the Seine, whence it was carried by land and water to the place of its
destination.

Upon the arrival of the funeral train at Caen, it was met by Gislebert,
bishop of Evreux, then abbot of St. Stephen's, at the head of his monks,
attended by a numerous throng of clergy and laity; but scarcely had the
bier been brought within the gates, when the report was spread that a
dreadful fire had broken out in another part of the town, and the duke's
remains were a second time deserted. The monks alone remained; and,
fearful and resolute, they bore their founder "with candle, with book, and
with knell," to his last home. Ordericus Vitalis enumerates the principal
prelates and barons assembled upon this occasion; but he makes no mention
of the Conqueror's son Henry, who, according to William of Jumieges, was
the only one worthy of succeeding such a father. Mass had now been
performed, and the body was about to be committed to the ground, "ashes to
ashes, dust to dust," when, previously to this closing part of the
ceremony, Gislebert mounted the pulpit, and delivered an ovation in honour
of the deceased. He praised his valour, which had so widely extended the
limits of the Norman dominion; his ability, which had elevated the nation
to the highest pitch of glory; his equity in the administration of justice;
his firmness in correcting abuses; and his liberality towards the monks
and clergy; then finally addressing the people, he besought them to
intercede with the Almighty for the soul of their prince. At this moment,
one Asselin, an obscure individual, starting from the crowd, exclaimed
with a loud voice, "the ground upon which you are standing was the site of
my father's dwelling. This man, for whom you ask our prayers, took it by
force from my parent; by violence he seized, by violence he retained it;
and, contrary to all law and justice, he built upon it this church,
wherein we are assembled. Publicly, therefore, in the sight of God and man,
do I claim my inheritance, and protest against the body of the plunderer
being covered with my turf." The appeal was attended with instant effect:
bishops and nobles united in their entreaties with Asselin; they admitted
the justice of his claim; they pacified him; they paid him sixty shillings
on the spot by way of recompense for the place of sepulture; and, finally,
they satisfied him for the rest of the land.

But the remarkable incidents doomed to attend upon this burial were not
yet at an end; for at the time when they were laying the corpse in the
sarcophagus, and were bending it with some force, which they were
compelled to do, in consequence of the coffin having been made too short,
the body, which was extremely corpulent, burst, and so intolerable a
stench issued from the grave, that all the perfumes which arose from all
the censers of the priests and acolytes were of no avail; and the rites
were concluded in haste, and the assembly, struck with horror, returned to
their homes.

The latter part of this story accords but ill with what De Bourgueville
relates. We learn from this author, that four hundred and thirty years
subsequent to the death of the Conqueror, a Roman cardinal, attended by an
archbishop and bishop, visited the town of Caen, and that his eminence
having expressed a wish to see the body of the duke, the monks yielded to
his curiosity, the tomb was opened, and the corpse discovered in so
perfect a state that the cardinal caused a portrait to be taken from the
lifeless features. It is not worth while now to inquire into the truth of
this story, or the fidelity of the resemblance. The painting has
disappeared in the course of time: it hung for awhile against the walls of
the church, opposite to the monument, but it was stolen during the tumults
caused by the Huguenots, and was broken into two pieces, in which state De
Bourgueville saw it a few years afterwards, in the hands of a Calvinist,
one Peter Hode, the gaoler at Caen, who used it in the double capacity of
a table and a door. The worthy magistrate states, that he kept the picture,
"because the abbey-church was demolished."

He was himself present at the second violation of the royal tomb, in 1572;
and he gives a piteous account of the transaction. The monument raised to
the memory of the Conqueror, by his son. William Rufus, under the
superintendance of Lanfrane, was a production of much costly and elaborate
workmanship; the shrine, which was placed upon the mausoleum, glittered
with gold and silver and precious stones. To complete the whole, the
effigy of the king had been added to the tomb at some period subsequent to
its original erection. A monument like this naturally excited the rapacity
of a lawless banditti, unrestrained by civil or military force, and
inveterate against every thing that might be regarded as connected with
the Catholic worship. The Calvinists were masters of Caen, and, incited by
the information of what had taken place at Rouen, they resolved to repeat
the same outrages. Under the specious pretext of abolishing idolatrous
worship, they pillaged and ransacked every church and monastery: they
broke the windows and organs, destroyed the images, stole the
ecclesiastical ornaments, sold the shrines, committed pulpits, chests,
books, and whatever was combustible, to the fire; and finally, after
having wreaked their vengeance upon every thing that could be made the
object of it, they went boldly to the town-hall to demand the wages for
their labours. In the course of these outrages the tomb of the Conqueror
at one abbey and that of Matilda, his queen, at the other, were demolished.
And this was not enough; but a few days afterwards, the same band returned,
allured by the hopes of farther plunder. They dug up the coffin: the
hollow stone rang to the strokes of their daggers: the vibration proved
that it was not filled by the corpse, and nothing more was wanting to seal
its destruction.

De Bourgueville, who went to the spot and exerted his eloquence to check
this last act of violence, witnessed the opening of the coffin. It
contained the bones of the king, wrapped up in red taffety, and still in
tolerable preservation; but nothing else. He collected them with care, and
consigned them to one of the monks of the abbey, who kept them in his
chamber, till the Admiral de Chatillon entered Caen at the head of his
mercenaries, on which occasion the whole abbey was plundered, and the
monks put to flight, and the bones lost. "Sad doings these," says De
Bourgueville, "_et bien peu reformez!_" He adds that one of the
thigh-bones was preserved by the Viscount of Falaise, who was there with
him, and begged it from the rioters, and that this bone was longer by four
fingers' breadth than that of a tall man. The bone thus preserved, was
reinterred, after the cessation of the troubles: it is the same that is
alluded to in the inscription, which also informs us that a monument was
raised over it in 1642, but was removed in 1742, it being then considered
as an incumbrance in the choir.

The melancholy end of the Conqueror, the strange occurrences at his
interment, the violation of his grave, the dispersion of his remains, and
the demolition and final removal of his monument, are circumstances
calculated to excite melancholy emotions in the mind of every one,
whatever his condition in life. In all these events, the religious man
traces the hand of retributive justice; the philosopher regards the
nullity of sublunary grandeur; the historian finds matter for serious
reflection; the poet for affecting narrative; and the moralist for his
tale.

J.R.S.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE SKETCH-BOOK.

THE PICNIC AT TEMPE.


It was the most sultry of the dog-days--Jupiter sat lolling in his arm
chair vainly endeavouring to get a quiet nap, and a little further sat
Minerva, lulling her father to sleep, as _she_ thought, and keeping him
awake, as _he_ thought, by the whirring noise of her spinning-wheel. At
length Venus entered the saloon in which they were sitting, and the noise
she made effectually aroused the Thunderer. "Venus, my darling, where's
your mother-in-law?" said Jupiter raising himself on his elbow.

"In her dressing room," replied Venus, "trying on some of my new
beautifying inventions."

"Ah," smiled Jupiter, "you women are never easy but when you're
beautifying yourselves: well, go and tell her I think we may as well take
a trip down to Tempe, by way of employment this hot day; and send Iris to
tell all the other gods to meet us there."

Away tripped Venus to execute her commission, and the Thunderer turned
again to doze; but suddenly a thought struck him: "Here, Pallas, go and
borrow Mars's curricle for Juno and myself to ride in, for it is much too
hot to think of walking, such a day as this, and tell him to put some
bottles of nectar in the driving box, d'ye hear?"

In a short time the curricle made its appearance, and Jove and Juno
mounted. But Mars's vehicle was constructed for a single gentleman, and
not for man and wife, who being rather too heavy for it, broke it down as
they descended Olympus, and rolled to the foot of the mountain amidst the
suppressed laughter of the other gods, who were winging their way down.
Iris was despatched to procure a fresh supply of nectar, which Bacchus
declared would nearly exhaust his stock. At last the table was spread in
the most delightful part of Tempe, and the top of Ossa was occupied by
Hercules with his club to see that no mortal intruded on the revels of the
gods, when Jupiter discovered something at a distance running at full
speed towards them. "Heyday! what have we here?" he exclaimed; "as I live,
my old friend Cerberus, with a note in his jaws; why what _can_ Pluto have
got to say? Here, Cer! Cer! Cer! good dog!" The breathless animal dropped
the letter at Jupiter's feet and then took his seat on the ground, panting,
as well he might, after so long a journey.

"Here's a pretty note," said Jupiter, and he proceeded to read it aloud
for the amusement of the company--

    "Dear Jove,

    "Knowing you are going to have a feast at Tempe I have sent my
    favourite Cerberus to pick up the crumbs as he gets but poor
    living in the shades here at Tartarus. Proserpine sends her love
    to Ceres.

    "Yours ever,

    "PLUTO."

    N.B. "Send Cerberus back at night."

"Faugh! how it stinks of brimstone!" said Jupiter, "we'll give poor
Cerberus a meal though, for he looks woefully thin; I should not think
Pluto gave him much from his appearance." So down they sat, Cerberus and
Jove's eagle being installed under the table, while Minerva's owl, Juno's
peacock, and the proteges of the other immortals were left to pick up what
they could outside. They had not sat long before the noise of a vast
contention was heard, and the cause being sought, it was discovered to be
a bone which Jupiter had thrown under the table, and which was violently
contested by Cerberus and the eagle. Peace was restored by the expulsion
of the offending eagle, as Jove said he ought to know better, having come
from Olympus, while Cerberus was brought up in Tartarus. All went on
quietly for a time, when Cerberus unfortunately squatted himself down on
Jupiter's thunderbolt, which its master had dropped under the table, and
giving a most terrific yell, rushed between the legs of Mercury's chair,
and upset him in a twinkling, while, almost before he could rise, poor
Cerberus was treading the "facilis descensus Averni," with his posteriors
sadly blackened by the accident; and roaring with pain as the gods were
with laughter. Dinner passed on without any more accidents, and when the
ladies retired, Vulcan and Mars sat down to ecarte, at which the former
proved the winner. Apollo drily remarked, (having just finished his daily
journey and joined the gods) that Vulcan had netted Mars's cash as well as
himself. Mars rose in a great rage, when Jupiter recommended him not to be
nettled, which only made him ten times more so. A quarrel was the
consequence; and Jupiter thinking it best to return before bloodshed was
committed, asked Apollo to yoke his team again, and drive them home, which
he readily consented to do: that night seemed unusually light to the
inhabitants of the hemisphere, and many learned heads were puzzled to
discover the cause of the phenomenon, but though many explanations were
given, the real reason remained undiscovered to this day--in which I have
the pleasure of laying it before my readers.

REX.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE GATHERER.


_Early Rising._--It cannot be denied that early rising is conducive both
to the health of the body and the improvement of the mind. It was an
observation of Swift, that he never knew any man come to greatness and
eminence who lay in bed of a morning. Though this observation of an
individual is not received as an universal maxim, it is certain that some
of the most eminent characters which ever existed, accustomed themselves
to early rising. It seems, also, that people in general rose earlier in
former times than now. In the fourteenth century, the shops in Paris were
opened at four in the morning; at present, a shopkeeper is scarcely awake
at seven.[8] The King of France dined at eight in the morning, and retired
to his bedchamber at the same hour in the evening. During the reign of
Henry VIII. fashionable people in England breakfasted at seven in the
morning, and dined at ten in the forenoon. In Elizabeth's time, the
nobility, gentry, and students, dined at eleven in the forenoon, and
supped between five and six in the afternoon.

SWAINE.


    [8] Our correspondent is here somewhat in error: shops in Paris
        may be seen _set out_ by seven o'clock in the morning.--ED. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Dick's Coffee-house, Temple Bar_.--The Rev. James Miller wrote a comedy,
in the year 1737, entitled "_The Coffee House_." "This piece met with no
kind of success, from a supposition, how just (says Baker,) I cannot
pretend to determine, that Mrs. Yarrow and her daughter, who kept Dick's
coffee-house, near Temple Bar, and were at that time celebrated toasts,
together with several persons who frequented that house, were intended to
be ridiculed by the author. This he absolutely denied as being his
intention; when the piece came out, however, the engraver who had been
employed to compose a frontispiece, having inadvertently fixed on that
very coffee-house for the scene of his drawing, the Templars, with whom
the abovementioned ladies were great favourites, became, by this accident,
so confirmed in their suspicions, that they united to damn the piece, and
even extended their resentment to every thing which was suspected to be
this author's, for a considerable time after."

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Heroic Women._--Browella _heide_ or _heath_, is a plain in the province
of Smaland, in Sweden, celebrated for being the place where the Danes were
totally routed by the heroine, Blenda, who commanded the Smaland women, in
defence of their husbands, who were engaged in another expedition. As a
recompense for their bravery, the women of Smaland were honoured with
extraordinary privileges, and wore a kind of martial head-dress; and they
have still an equal share of inheritance with the men.

P.T.W.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ancient Roundelaye for Foure Personnes._


  1st. Sing we the goodfellowes roundelaye,
       And I the cittern will blithele playe.
  2nd. I'll sing tenor.
  3rd. The treble for me.
  1st. And what shalle the bass of our music be?
  4th. The wintry winde as it rushes and roars
       At the windowes and roofe, and the welle fast'ned doore.
  2nd. But the wine and the sack, and the canary are bright,
       They're the good fellowes starres that shine out thro' the nighte.
       You're a knave if you quit them till morning.
  1st. to 2nd. You're a knave.
  4th. to 3rd. You're a knave.
  3rd. to 1st. You're a knave.
       _Omnes._ He's a knave who forsakes them till morn.

P.S. The point of this song consists in each singer being called a knave
in turn.

M.L.E.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Ecstacy of Michael Angelo._--When the bronze gates of the baptistry of
the church of Florence were produced, Michael Angelo cried out with
emotion, at the sight of them, "that they deserved to be the gates of
Paradise." Casts of these gates may be seen in the Royal Academy, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Power of Knowledge over Brute Force._--There is a popular story, that a
student from Oxford was attacked by a wild boar, which issued from the
adjoining forest of Shotover, when he escaped by cramming down the throat
of the brute, a volume of Aristotle.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPLETION of VOL. XIX. of THE MIRROR.

With the present Number, price Twopence,

A SUPPLEMENT, WITH A STEEL-PLATE PORTRAIT OF THE RIGHT HON. EARL GREY,

A Memoir of his Lordship, and Title-page, Preface, and Index to Vol. XIX.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Printed and published by J. LIMBIRD, 143, Strand, (near Somerset House,)
London; sold by ERNEST FLEISCHER, 626, New Market, Leipsic; G.G. BENNIS,
55, Rue Neuve, St. Augustin, Paris; and by all Newsmen and Booksellers._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MIRROR OF LITERATURE, NO. 556 ***

***** This file should be named 12574.txt or 12574.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/5/7/12574/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Allen Siddle and PG Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL


