The Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 99,
August 9, 1890., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. 99, August 9, 1890.

Author: Various

Release Date: July 5, 2004 [EBook #12825]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***




Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Sandra Brown and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.






PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOLUME 99.



August 9, 1890.




FIRST AID TO TOMMY ATKINS.

Sir,--I visited the Military Exhibition the other day according to
your instructions, my bosom glowing with patriotic ardour. If anything
besides your instructions and the general appropriateness of the
occasion had been necessary to make my bosom glow thus, it would have
been found in the fact that I formerly served my country in a Yeomanry
Regiment. I shall never forget the glorious occasions on which I wore
a cavalry uniform, and induced some of my best friends to believe
I had gone to the dogs and enlisted. However, to relate my Yeomanry
adventures, which included a charge by six of us upon a whole army,
would be to stray from my point, which is to describe what I saw at
the Military Exhibition. I was lame (oh, dear no, not the gout, a mere
strain) and took a friend, an amiable young man, with me to lean upon.

[Illustration]

"There's one place I really _do_ know," he had said to me, "and that's
this bally place."

I therefore felt I was safe with him. We arrived. We entered. "Take
me," I said, "to the battle-pictures, so that I may study my country's
glories."

"Right!" he answered, and with a promptitude that does him immense
credit, he brought me out into a huge arena in the open air with seats
all round it, a grand stand, and crowds of spectators. The performance
in the arena so deeply interested me that I forgot all about the
pictures. I saw at once what it was. Detachments of our citizen
soldiers were going through ambulance drill. The sight was one which
appealed to our common humanity. My daring, dangerous Yeomanry days
rose up again before me, and I felt that if ever I had had to bleed
for my QUEEN I should not have bled untended. Even my companion,
a scoffer, who had never risen above a full privacy in the Eton
Volunteers, was strangely moved. There were, I think, ten detachments,
each provided with a stretcher and a bag containing simple surgical
appliances. All that was wanted to complete the realism of the picture
was the boom of the cannon, the bursting of shells, and the rattle of
musketry. In imagination I supplied them, as I propose to do, for your
benefit, Sir, in the following short account.

It was a sultry afternoon; the battle had been raging for hours; the
casualties had been terrible. "Dress up, there, dress up!" said the
Sergeant in command, addressing detachment No. 2, "and you, JENKINS,
tilt your forage-cap a leetle more over your right ear; BROWN, don't
blow your nose, the General's looking; God bless my soul, THOMPSON,
you've buckled that strap wrong, undo it and re-buckle it at once."
With such words as these he cheered his men, while to right and left
the death-dealing missiles sped, on their course. "Stand at ease;
'shon! Stand at ease! 'shon!" he next shouted. A Corporal at this
point was cut in two by a ball from, a forty-pounder, but nobody
paid any heed to him. Stiff, solid, and in perfect line, stood the
detachments waiting for the word to succour the afflicted. At last it
came. In the midst of breathless excitement the ten bent low, placed
their folded stretchers on the ground, unbuckled and unfolded them,
and then with a simultaneous spring rose up again and resumed their
impassive attitude. "Very good," said the Sergeant, "very good.
THOMPSON you were just a shade too quick; you must be more careful.
Stand at ease!" and at ease they all stood.

But where were the wounded? Aha! here they come, noble, fearless
heroes, all in line, marching with a springy step to their doom.

One by one they took their places, in line at intervals of about ten
yards, and lay down each on his appointed spot to die, or be wounded,
and to be bandaged and carried off. But now a terrible question arose.
_Would there be enough to go round?_ I had only counted nine of them,
which was one short of the necessary complement, but at this supreme
moment another grievously wounded warrior ran lightly up and lay down
opposite the tenth detachment. We breathed again.

And now began some charming manoeuvres. Each detachment walked round
its stretcher twice, then stood at ease again, then at attention, then
dressed up and arranged itself, and brushed, itself down. All this
while their wounded comrades lay writhing, and appealing for help
in vain. It was with difficulty that, lame as I was, I could be
restrained from dashing to their aid. But at last everything was in
order. Stretchers were solemnly lifted. The detachments marched slowly
forward, and deposited their stretchers each beside a wounded man.
Then began a scene of busy bandaging. But not until the whole ten had
been bound up, legs, arms, heads, feet, fingers &c, was it permissible
to lift one of them from the cold cold ground which he had bedewed
with his blood.

"Now then," said the Sergeant, "carefully and all together. Lift!"
and all together they were lifted and placed in their stretchers. More
play with straps and buckles, more rising and stooping, and then the
pale and gasping burdens were at last raised and carried in a mournful
procession round the ground. But when they arrived at the place
where the ambulance was supposed to be, they had all been dead,
three-quarters of an hour. "Dear me," said the Sergeant, "how vexing.
ROBINSON, your chin-strap's gone wrong. Now, all together. Drop 'em!"
And so the day ended, and the pitiless sun sated with, &c., &c., &c.

I afterwards visited the Field Hospital to see a number of wax figures
in uniform, cheerfully arranged as wounded men in all the stages
of pain and misery. How encouraging for TOMMY ATKINS, I thought
to myself; but at this moment my supporter informed me that he had
remembered where to find the battle-pictures, and thither therefore
we proceeded, thankful in the knowledge that if either of us ever
happened to be struck down in battle he would be well looked after by
an admirably drilled body of men.

I am, Sir,
Yours as usual,
LE PETIT SHOWS.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PROFESSIONAL GUEST AT A COUNTRY HOUSE.

DEAR MR. PUNCH,

Trusting that you take some interest in my fate, after the more or
less pleasant (?) week I spent at Henley, I hasten to let you know
that I am again visiting friends, though this time on _terra firma_,
and that the customary trials of the "Professional Guest" are once
more my portion. The very evening of my arrival, I discovered that a
man with whom I had not been on speaking terms for years was to be my
neighbour at dinner, and that a girl (who really I cannot understand
_any one_ asking to their house) with the strangest coloured hair, and
the most unnaturally dark eyes, was taken in by the host, and called
"darling" by the hostess. After dinner, which, by reason of the
"range" being out of order, was of a rather limited type, they all
played cards. That is a form of amusement I don't like--I can't afford
it; and this, coupled with the fact that I was not asked to sing,
somewhat damped my ardour as regards visiting strange houses.

[Illustration]

A hard bed, and a distant snore, kept me awake till break of day,
when, for a brief space, I successfully wooed Morpheus. I think I
slept for seven minutes. Then a loud bell rang, and several doors on
an upper floor were heavily banged. I heard the servants chattering as
they went down to breakfast. Then there was silence, and once more I
composed myself to rest, when the dreadest sound of all broke on my
ear. _The baby began to cry._ Then I gave it up as hopeless, but it
was with a sensation of being more dead than alive that I crawled down
to breakfast--late, of course. One is always late the first morning in
a strange house--one can never find one's things. I bore with my best
professional smile the hearty chaff of my host (how I hate a hearty
man the first thing in the morning) and the audible remarks of the
dear children who were seated at intervals round the table. But
my patience well-nigh gave way when I found that our hostess had
carefully mapped out for her guests a list of amusements (save the
mark!) which extended not only over that same day, but several ensuing
ones.

I am not of a malice-bearing nature, but I do devoutly pray that she,
too, may one day taste the full horror of being tucked into a high
dog-cart alongside of a man who you know cannot drive; the tortures,
both mental and physical, of a long walk down dusty roads and over
clayey fields to see that old Elizabethan house "only a mile off;"
or the loathing induced by a pic-nic among mouldering and utterly
uninteresting ruins. All this I swallowed with the equanimity and
patience born of many seasons of country-house visiting; I even
interviewed the old family and old-fashioned cook, on the subject of
a few new dishes, and I helped to entertain some of those strange
aboriginal creatures called "the county." But the announcement one
afternoon, that we were to spend the next in driving ten miles to
attend a Primrose League _Fete_ in the private grounds of a local
magnate, proved too much for me. Shall you be surprised to hear that
on the following morning I received an urgent telegram recalling me
to town? My hostess was, or affected to be, overwhelmned that by my
sudden departure I should miss the _fete_. I knew, however, that
the "dyed" girl rejoiced, and in company with the objectionable man
metaphorically threw up her hat.

As I passed through the Lodge-gates on my way to the station I almost
vowed that I would never pay another visit again. But even as I write,
an invitation was brought me. It is from my Aunt. She writes that she
has taken charming rooms at Flatsands, and hopes I will go and stay
with her there for a few days. She thinks the sea air will do me good.
Perhaps it will. I shall write at once and accept.

THE ODD GIRL OUT.

FROM OUR YOTTING YORICK, P.A.

_Aboard the Yot "Placid," bound for Copenhagen (I hope)._

DEAR EDITOR,

You told me when I set sail (I didn't set sail myself, you understand,
but the men did it for me, or rather for my friends, Mr and Mrs.
SKIPPER, to whose kindness I owe my present position--which is far
from a secure one,--but no matter), you said to me, YORICK Yotting
has no buffoonery left in him? I too, who was once the life of all
the Lifes and Souls of a party! Where is that party now? Where am _I_?
What is my life on board? Life!--say existence. I rise early; I can't
help it. I am tubbed on deck: deck'd out in my best towels. So I
commence the day by going to Bath. [That's humorous, isn't it? I hope
so. I mean it as such.]

[Illustration]

"Send me notes of your voyage to Sweden and Norway, and the land of
_Hamlet_. You'll see lots of funny things, and you'll take a humorous
view of what isn't funny; send me your humorous views." Well, Sir, I
sent you "_Mr. Punch looking at the Midnight Sun_." pretty humorous I
think ("more pretty than humorous," you cabled to me at Bergen), and
since that I have sent you several beautiful works of Art, in return
for which I received another telegram from you saying, "No 'go.' Send
something funny." The last I sent ("_The Church-going Bell_," a
pretty peasant woman in a boat--"_belle_," you see) struck me as very
humorous. The idea of people going to Church in a boat!

What was I to do? Well--here at last I send you something which _must_
be humorous. It looks like it. _Mr. Punch_ driving in Norway, in a
_cariole. Mr. Punch_ anywhere is humorous; and with TOBY too; though I
am perfectly aware that TOBY, M.P., is in his place in the House;
but then TOBY is ubarquitous. That's funny, isn't it?--see "bark"
substituted for "biq," the original word being "ubiquitous." This is
the sort of "_vuerdtwistren_" at which they roar in Sweden.

It's all _tres bien_ (very well) but how the deuce can you be funny in
the Baltic? Why call it Baltic? For days and nights at sea, sometimes
up, more often down, and a sense of inability coming over me in the
middle of the boundless deep. Alas, poor YORICK!

Then breakfast. Then lunch. Then dinner. No drinking permitted between
meals: to which regulation. _I am gradually becoming habituated._ It
is difficult to acquire new habits. Precious difficult in mid-ocean,
where there isn't a tailor. [Humorous again, eh?] I now understand
what is the meaning of "a Depression is crossing the Atlantic."
There's an awful Depression hanging about the Baltic.

[Illustration]

I send you a sketch of Elsinore, as I thought it would be, and
Elsinore as it is. Elsinore is like the Pumping Works at Barking
Creek. And I've come all this way to see this!! Elsinore! I'd rather
go Elsewhere-inore,--say, Margate.

Think I shall put this in a bottle, cork it up, and send it overboard,
and you'll get it by Tidal Post. Whether I do this or not depends on
circumstances over which I may possibly have no control. Anyhow, at
dinner-time, _I shall ask for the bottle._ When you ask for it, see
that you get it.

Yours truly,
JETSAM

_(or Yotting Artist in Black and White). 10 A.M. Swedish time 9.5 in
English miles. Longitude 4 ft. 8 in. in my berth. Latitude, any amount
of._

       *       *       *       *       *

AN EXCELLENT RULE.--We are informed that "extreme ugliness" and "male
hysteria" are admitted as "adequate disqualifications" for the French
Army. If the same rule only applied to the English House of Commons,
what a deal of noise and nonsense we should be spared!

[Illustration: A METROPOLITAN METAMORPHOSIS.

_The Awful Result of Persistent "Crawling."_]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE DYING SWAN.

_(Latest Version, a long way after the Laureate.)_

    "THAMES 'SWAN UPPING.'--The QUEEN'S swanherd and the officials
    of the Dyers' and Vintners' Companies arrived at Windsor
    yesterday on their annual 'swan-upping' visit, for the purpose
    of marking or 'nicking' the swans and cygnets belonging to HER
    MAJESTY, and the Companies interested in the preservation of
    the birds that haunt the stream between London and Henley. It
    is said that the Thames swans are steadily decreasing owing
    to the traffic on the upper reaches of the river, and other
    causes detrimental to their breeding."--_The Times_.

  I.

  July was wet,--a thing not rare--
  With sodden ground and chilly air;
  The sky presented everywhere
  A low-pitched roof of doleful grey;
  With a rain-flusht flood the river ran;
  Adown it floated a dying Swan,
  And loudly did lament.
  It was the middle of the day,
  The "Swanherd" and his men went on,
  "Nicking" the cygnets as they went.

  II.

  The "Swanherd" showed a blue-peaked nose,
  And white against the cold white sky
  Shone many a face of those
  Who o'er the upper reaches swept,
  On swans and cygnets keeping an eye.
  Dyers and Vintners, portly, mellow
  Chasing the birds of the jetty bill
  Through the reed clusters green and still;
  And through the osier mazes crept
  Many a cap-feathered crook-armed fellow.

  III.

  The lone Swan's _requiem_ smote the soul
  With the reverse of joy.
  It spake of sorrow, of outfalls queer,
  Dyeing the floods once full and clear;
  Of launches wildly galumphing by,
  Washing the banks into hollow and hole;
  Sometimes afar, and sometimes a-near.
  All-marring 'ARRY'S exuberant voice,
  With music strange and manifold,
  Howling out choruses loud and bold
  As when Bank-holidayites rejoice
  With concertinas, and the many-holed
  Shrill whistle of tin, till the riot is rolled
  Through shy backwaters, where swan-nests are;
  And greasy scraps of the _Echo_ or _Star_,
  Waifs from the cads' oleaginous feeds,
  Emitting odours reekingly rank,
  Drift under the clumps of the water-weeds,
  And broken bottles invade the reeds,
  And the wavy swell of the many-barged tug
  Breaks, and befouls the green Thames' bank.
  And the steady decrease of the snow-plumed throng
  That sail the upper Thames reaches among,
  Was prophesied in that plaintive song.

       *       *       *       *       *

DOING IT CHEAPLY.

A re-action against the extravagance which marked the entertainments
of the London Season of 1890 having set in, the following rules and
regulations will be observed in the Metropolis until further notice.

1. Persons invited to dinner parties will be expected to furnish their
own plate and linen, and some of the viands and wines to be used at
the feast.

2. To carry out the above, a _menu_ of the proposed meal will form a
part of every card of invitation, which will run as follows:--"Mr. and
Mrs. ---- request the honour of Mr. and Mrs. ----'s company to dinner,
on ---- when they will kindly bring with them enough for twelve
persons of the dish marked ---- on the accompanying _Menu_, P.T.O."

3. Persons invited to a Ball will treat the supper as a pic-nic, to
which all the guests are expected to contribute.

4. On taking leave of a hostess every guest will slip into her hand a
packet containing a sum of money sufficient to defray his or her share
of the evening's expenses.

5. Ladies making calls at or about five o'clock, will bring with
them tea, sugar, milk, pound-cake, cucumber sandwiches, and bread and
butter.

6. As no bands will be furnished at evening parties, guests who can
play will be expected to bring their musical instruments with them.
N.B. This does not apply to pianofortes on the premises, for which a
small sum will be charged to those who use them.

7. Should a _cotillon_ be danced, guests will provide their own
presents, which will become the perquisites of the host and hostess.

8, _and lastly_. Should the above rules, compiled in the interest
of leaders of Society, be insufficient to keep party-givers from
appearing in the Court of Bankruptcy, guests who have partaken of any
hospitality will be expected to contribute a gratuity, to enable the
Official Receiver to declare a small and final dividend.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERQUISITES.--"Nice thing to belong to National Liberal Club,"
observed Mr. G., who didn't dine at that establishment for nothing,
"because, you see, they go in there for 'Perks.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

"NOBLESSE OBLIGE!"

_(Latest Reading.)_

  _Noblesse oblige!_ And what's the obligation,
  Read in the light of recent demonstration?
  A member of "our old Nobility"
  May be "obliged," at times, to play the spy,
  Lay traps for fancied frailty, disenthrall
  "Manhood" by "playing for" a woman's fall;
  Redeem the wreckage of a "noble" name
  By building hope on sin, and joy on shame;
  Redress the work of passion's reckless boldness
  By craven afterthoughts of cynic coldness;
  Purge from low taint "the blood of all the HOWARDS"
  By borrowings from the code of cads and cowards!
  _Noblesse oblige?_ Better crass imbecility
  Of callow youth--_with_ pluck--than such "nobility"!

       *       *       *       *       *

HOME-ING.--Dr. BARNARDO'S delightfully simple plan of getting a little
boy to sign an affidavit to the effect that he was so happy at Dr.
BARNARDO'S Home, Sweet Home, and that, wherever he might wander, there
was really no place on earth like Dr. BARNARDO'S Home, may remind
Dickensian students of a somewhat analogous method apparently adopted
by _Mr. Squeers_ when, on his welcome return to Dotheboys Hall, he
publicly announced that "he had seen the parents of some boys, and
they're so glad to hear how their sons are getting on, that there's
no prospect at all of their going away, which, of course, is a very
pleasant thing to reflect upon for all parties." The conduct of such
parents or relatives who send children or permit them to be sent to
Dr. BARNARDO'S Home, Sweet Home, where, at all events, they are well
fed and cared for, bears some resemblance to that of _Graymarsh's_
maternal aunt, who was "short of money, but sends a tract instead, and
hopes that _Graymarsh_ will put his trust in Providence," and also
to that of _Mobb's_ "mother-in-law," who was so disgusted with
her stepson's conduct (for DICKENS meant step-mother when he wrote
"mother-in-law"--an odd _lapsus calami_ never subsequently corrected)
that she "stopped his halfpenny a-week pocket-money, and had given a
double-bladed knife with a corkscrew in it to the Missionaries, which
she had bought on purpose for him." We don't blame Dr. BARNARDO--much;
but we do blame these weak-knee'd parents and guardians, who
apparently don't know their own minds. In the recent case which was
sarcastically treated by the Judge, Dr. B. found that he could buy
GOULD too dear.

SOMETHING LIKE A REVOLUTION!

_(From Our Own Correspondent on the Spot.)_

[Illustration: Our Correspondent at Breakfast.]

_Samol Plazo_, 8 A.M.--My _plat_ of _egsibaconi_ has just been knocked
out of the hands of my servant, PATPOTATO, by a bullet. My man (who
is of Irish extraction) thinks that the long-expected revolution
must have commenced; "for," as he argues, "when everything is down,
something is sure to be up." I think so too. I am now going to
Government House. If I don't get this through, make complaint at the
Post Office, for it will be their fault not mine.

9 A.M.--Am now at Head Quarters. Not much trouble getting here. Came
by a _bussi_, a local conveyance drawn by two horses, and much used by
the humbler classes. On our road one of the steeds and the roof of the
_bussi_ were carried away by a shell, but as I was inside this caused
me little annoyance, and I got comfortably to my destination with the
remainder. Just seen the President, who says laughingly, that "there
has been practically nothing but perfect peace and quiet." I doubt
whether this can be quite the case, as he was sitting in front of
Government House, which was at that very moment undergoing a vigorous
bombardment. When I pointed this out to him, he confessed that he had
noticed it himself, but did not think much of it. He was in excellent
spirits, and told me a funny story about the narrow escape of his
mother-in-law. I am now off to see how the other side are progressing.
If the Post Office people tell you they can't send my telegrams to
you, refuse to believe them.

[Illustration: Narrow Escape of Our Correspondent.]

10 A.M.--As I suspected, from the first, there _has_ been a
disturbance. I thought it must be so, as I could not otherwise
understand why my _cabbi_ should have been blown into the air, while
passing through a mined street on the road here. I am now at the
Head Quarters of the Oniononi, who seem to be in great strength. They
appear to be very pleased that the fleet should have joined them, and
account for the action by saying that the sailors, as bad shots, would
naturally blaze away at the biggest target--Government House. So far,
the disturbances have caused little inconvenience. I date this 10
A.M., but I cannot tell you the exact time, as the clock-tower has
just been carried away by a new kind of land torpedo.

12, NOON.--I am now once again at the Government Head Quarters. As I
could get no better conveyance, I inflated my canvas carpet-bag with
gas, and used it as a balloon. I found it most valuable in crossing
the battery which now masks the remains of what was once
Government House. The President, after having organised a band of
_pic-pockettini_ (desperadoes taken from the gaols), has gone into
the provinces, declaring that he has a toothache. By some, this
declaration is deemed a subterfuge, by others, a statement savouring
of levity. The artillery are now reducing the entire town to atoms,
under the personal supervision of the Minister of Finance, who
deprecates waste in ammunition, and declares that he is bound to the
President by the tie of the battle-field.

[Illustration: Our Correspondent in an Elevated Position.]

2 P.M.--Have rejoined the Oniononi, coming hither by ricochet on a
spent shell. The people are entirely with them, and cheer at every
fresh evidence of destruction. Found a well-known shopkeeper in
ecstasies over the ruins of his establishment. He said that, "Although
the revolution might be bad for trade, it would do good, as things
wanted waking up." A slaughter of police and railway officials, which
has just been carried out with infinite spirit, seems to be immensely
popular. If you don't get this, make immediate complaint. Don't
accept, as an excuse, that the wires have been cut, and the office
razed to the ground. They can get it through, if they like.

4 P.M.--Just heard a report that I myself have been killed and buried.
As I can get no corroboration of this statement, I publish it under
reservation. I confine myself to saying that it may be true, although
I have my doubts upon the subject.

6 P.M.--It seems (as I imagined) that the report of my death and
funeral is a canard. This shows how necessary it is to test the truth
of every item of information before hurrying off to the Telegraph
Office. Efforts are now being made to bring about a reconciliation
between the contending parties.

8 P.M.--The revolution is over. When both sides had exhausted their
ammunition, peace naturally became a necessity. The contending parties
are now dining together, _al fresco_, as the town is in ruins. Nothing
more to add save, All's well that ends well!

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. PUNCH'S DICTIONARY OF PHRASES.

WORKMEN'S.

_"Merry Christmas to you, Sir, and many on 'em!" i.e.,_ "Have you got
that half-crown handy?"

IN THE SMOKING-ROOM.

_"Quite so; but then, you see, that's not my point;" i.e.,_ "It _was_,
ten minutes ago."

_"Yes, but allow me one moment;" i.e.,_ "Kindly give me your close
attention for twenty-five minutes."

SOCIAL.

_"Not your fault, indeed! Mine for having so long a train;" i.e.,_
"Awkward toad!"

_"Where did you get that lovely dress, dear?" i.e.,_ "That I may avoid
that dress-maker."

THEATRICAL.

_"Whose talents have been seen to better advantage:" i.e.,_ "A cruel
bad actor--but can't say so."

_"When the nervousness of a first night has been got over;" i.e.,_
"Never saw a worse play--but it may catch on."

_"The Author's modesty prevented him from responding to loud calls;"
i.e.,_ "Timid youth, probably. Foresaw brickbats."

       *       *       *       *       *

"BRAVO, TORO!"--M. CONSTANS will not allow Bull-fighting in Paris,
even for "the benefit of the Martinique sufferers." Quite right! But
if he would only discourage "Bull-fighting" in Egypt--the sort of
"Bull-fighting" desired by Chauvinist M. DELONCLE--he would do good
service to the land of the Pyramids, to the poor fellah, and to
civilisation.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE FROM BRIGHTON.--The exterior of the recently-opened Hotel
Metropole, is so effective, that the Architect, Mr. WATERHOUSE, R.A.,
is likely to receive many commissions for the erection of similar
hostelries at our principal marine resorts. He will take out
letters patent for change of name, and be known henceforward as Mr.
SEA-WATERHOUSE, R.A. By the way, the Directors of the Gordon Hotels
Co. wish it to be generally known that they have not started a
juvenile hotel for half-price children, under the name of the Gordon
Boys' Hotel.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

[Illustration]

Who remembers a certain story called, if I remember aright, _The
Wheelbarrow of Bordeaux_, that appeared in a Christmas Number of the
_Illustrated London News_ some years ago? If no one else does, I do,
says the Baron; and that sensational story was a sensational sell,
wherein the agony was piled up to the "n'th," and just as the secret
was about to be disclosed, the only person who knew it, and was on
the point of revealing it, died. This is the sort of thing that Mr.
RUDYARD KIPLING has just done in this month's _Lippincott's Magazine_.
It is told in a plain, rough and ready, blunt style, but so blunt that
there's no point in it. And the idea,--that is if the idea be that the
likeness of the assassin remains on the retina of the victim's eye,
and can be reproduced by photography,--is not a novelty. Perhaps
this story in _Lippincott_ comes out of one of Mr. RUDYARD KIPLING'S
pigeon-holes, and was just chucked in haphazard, because Editorial
_Lippincott_ wanted something with the name of the KIPLING, "bright
and merry," to it. It's not very "bright," and it certainly isn't
"merry."

_Black's Guide to Kent_ for 1890, useful in many respects, but not
quite up to date. The Baron cannot find any information about the
splendid Golf Grounds, nor the Golf Club at Sandwich; it speaks of
Sir MOSES MONTEFIORE'S place on the East Cliff of Ramsgate as if
that benevolent centenarian were still alive; and it retains an
old-fashioned description of Ramsgate as "The favorite resort of
superior London tradesmen"--"which," says the Baron, "is, to my
certain knowledge, very far from being the case." It talks of
the "humours of the sands," and alludes to what is merely the
cheap-trippers' season, as if this could possibly be the best time for
Ramsgate. The _Guide_ knows nothing, or at least says nothing, of
the Winter attractions; of the excellent pack of harriers; of the
delightful climate from mid-September to January; of the southern
aspect; of the pure air; of the many excursions to Ash, Deal,
Sandwich, Ickham, and so forth; nor can the Baron discover any mention
of the Granville Hotel, nor of the Albion Club, nor of the sport for
fishers and shooters; nor of the Riviera-like mornings in November and
in the early Spring, which are the real attractions of Ramsgate, and
make it one of the finest health-resorts in Winter for all "who
love life, and would see good days." "It reminds me," says the Baron,
puffing off his smoke indignantly, "of Mr. IRVING and a certain
youthful critic, who, in his presence at supper, had been running
down _Macbeth_, finding fault with the Lyceum production of it,
and ridiculing SHAKSPEARE for having written it. When he had quite
finished HENRY IRVING, 'laying low' in his chair at the table,
adjusted his pince-nez, and, looking straight at the clever young
gentleman, asked, in the mildest possible tone, 'My dear Sir, have you
ever _read Macbeth?_' So," resumes the Baron, "I am inclined to ask
Mr. BLACK'S young man, 'Do you _know_ Ramsgate?' And of course I mean
the Ramsgate of 1890."

From the specimens of _London City_ that have been sent for inspection
by Messrs. FIELD & TUER, of the Leadenhall Press, who are bringing it
out, the Baron augurs a grand result, artistically and financially. It
is to be published at forty-two shillings, but subscribers will get
it for a guinea, so intending possessors had evidently better become
subscribers. The history of the Great City is to be told by Mr. W.J.
LOFTIE, so that it starts with an elevated tone and the loftiest
principles, and the illustrations will be by Mr. WM. LUKER, a talented
draughtsman who, as a Luker-on has seen most of the games in the City.
In consequence of some piratical publisher having attempted to bring
out a work under the same title, intended to deceive even the elect,
Messrs. FIELD & TUER have secured the copyright of the title _London
City_, by the ingenious device of publishing, for one farthing each,
five hundred copies of a miniature pamphlet bearing this title, and
containing the explanation. The value of these eccentric farthing
pamphlets may one day be thousands of pounds. _Mem_.--Twopence would
be well invested in purchasing four of them.

_Salads and Sandwiches_ is an attractive title, specially at this
season. The arrangement of the book is, like the salad, a little
mixed. When, however, the knowing Baron finds that abomination known
as salad dressing, or "salad mixing," which is sold at the grocer's,
recommended by a writer who professes to teach salad-making, then he
closes the book, and reads no more that day. This author, who is in
his salad days, might bring out a book entitled _How to Suck Eggs; or,
Letters to my Grandmother_. It is a suggestion worth considering, says

THE BARON DE BOOK-WORMS.

[Illustration]

TO PYRRHA ON THE THAMES.

  O Pyrrha! say what youth in "blazer" drest,
  Woos you on pleasant Thames these summer eves;
  For whom do you put on that dainty vest,
  That sky-blue ribbon and those _gigot_ sleeves.

  "_Simplex munditiis_," as HORACE wrote,
  And yet, poor lad, he'll find that he is rash;
  To-morrow you'll adorn some other boat,
  And smile as kindly on another "mash."

  As for myself--I'm old, and look askance
  At flannels and flirtation; not for me
  Youth's idiotic rapture at a glance
  From maiden eyes: although it comes from thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN THE KNOW.

_(By Mr. Punch's Own Prophet.)_

I am a modest man, as well as an honest one. Censure cannot move me
by one hair's breadth from the narrow path of rectitude; praise cannot
unduly puff me up. Had I been other than I am, this last week would
have gone fatally near to ruining that timid and shrinking diffidence
which (I say it without egotism) marks me off from the poisonous,
pestilential, hydrocephalous, putty-faced, suet-brained reptiles who
disgrace the profession to which I belong. All I wish now to do is
to point out that _I am the only prophet_ who indicated, without any
beating about the bush, that _Marvel_ would win the Stewards' Cup
at Goodwood. My admirers have recognised the fact, and my private
residence has been choked by an avalanche of congratulatory
despatches, including two or three from some of the highest in the
land. H.S.H., the Grand Duke of PFEIFENTOPF says:--"You have me with
your writings much refreshed. I have the whole revenues of the Grand
Duchy against one thousand _flaschen_ of lager bier gebetted, and I
have won him on your noble advice on _Marvel_. I make you Commander of
the Honigthau Order." I merely cite this to show that my appreciators
are not to one country confined--I mean, confined to one country.

[Illustration]

What did I say last week, in speaking of the Stewards' Cup horses? By
the well-known grammatical figure known as the _hysteroproteron,_
I mentioned _Marvel_ last, intending, of course, as even a
buffalo-headed Bedlamite might have seen, that he should be first. And
he was first. But to make assurance doubly sure, and to bring prophecy
down to the intellectual level of a bat, I added, in speaking of the
winner, that he "would certainly be a _Marvel_." I say no more. As the
great Cardinal once observed to his chief of police, "_Je te verrai
souffle d'abord,"_ so I reply to those who wish me to reveal the
secret of my success. Mr. J. knows it not, and no single member of
the imbecile, anserous, asinine, cow-hocked, spavin-brained, venomous,
hugger-mugger purveyors of puddling balderdash who follow him has the
least conception of my glorious system. But I am willing to teach,
though I have nothing to learn. For six halfpenny stamps those who
desire to _know_, shall receive my pamphlet on "Book-making."
Every applicant must send his photograph with his application, not
necessarily for publication, but as a guarantee of good faith.

       *       *       *       *       *

"SUR LE TAPIS."--It was a carpet that ostensibly parted an eminent
firm of composer, author, and theatrical manager. W.S.G. didn't want
D'OYLY CARPET--no, beg pardon, should have written D'OYLY CARTE to
have _carte blanche_. [Pretty name this. Is there a BLANCHE CARTE? If
not, "make it so."]--to do whatever he liked whenever he liked with
the decorating and upholstering of the theatre. And recently another
carpet, not in connection with the above firm, created a difficulty.
What's a thousand-guinea carpet to a man who likes this sort of
thing? Nothing. Yet as _amici curiae_, we would have thought that that
Tottenham Road carpet might have been kept out of Court. Wasn't that a
Blunder, MAPLE?

[Illustration: THE LOVE LETTER.--A STUDY OF INDISCRETION.]

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM NILE TO NEVA.

    ["And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve
    with rigour. And they made their lives bitter with hard
    bondage."--_Exodus._

    "The Russian Government, by the new edicts legalises
    persecution, and openly declares war against the Jews of the
    Empire."--_Times._]

  "BEWARE!" 'Tis a voice from the shades,
  from the dark of three thousand long years,
  But it falls like the red blade of RA, and
  should echo in Tyranny's ears
  With the terror of overhead thunder; from
  Nile to the Neva it thrills,
  And it speaks of the judgment of wrong, of
  the doom of imperious wills.
  When PENTAOUR sang of the PHARAOH, alone
  by Orontes, at bay,
  By the chariots compassed about of the foe
  who were fierce for the fray,
  He sang of the dauntless oppressor, of RAMESES,
  conquering king;
  But were there such voice by the Neva to-day,
  of what now should he sing?
  Of tyranny born out of time, of oppression
  belated and vain?
  Put up the old weapon, O despot, slack hand
  from the scourge and the chain;
  For the days of the PHARAOHS are done, and
  the laureates of tyranny mute,
  And the whistle of falchion and flail are not
  set to the chords of the lute.
  True, the Hebrew, who bowed to the lash of
  the Pyramid-builders, bows still,
  For a time, to the knout of the TSAR, to the
  Muscovite's merciless will;
  But four millions of Israel's children are not
  to be crushed in the path
  Of a TSAR, like the Hittites of old, when great
  RAMESES flamed in his wrath
  Alone through their numberless hosts. No,
  the days of the Titans of Wrong
  Are past, for the Truth is a torch, and the
  voice of the peoples is strong.
  Even PENTAOUR, the poet of Might, spake in
  pity that rings down the years
  Of the life of "the peasant that tills" of his
  terrible toil and his tears;
  Of the rats and the locusts that ravaged, and,
  worse, the tax-gathering horde
  Who tithed all his pitiful tilth with the aid
  of the stick and the cord;
  And the splendour of RAMESES pales in the
  text of the old Coptic Muse,
  And--one hears the mad rush of the wheels
  that the fierce Red Sea billow pursues!

  O Muscovite, blind in your wrath, with
  your heel on the Israelite's neck,
  And your hand on that baleful old blade,
  Persecution, 'twere wisdom to reck
  The PHARAOH'S calm warning. Beware!
  Lo, the Pyramids pierce the grey gloom
  Of a desert that is but a waste, by a river
  that is but a tomb,
  Yet the Hebrew abides and is strong.
  AMENEMAN is gone to the ghosts,
  He the prince of the Coptic police who so
  harried the Israelite hosts
  When their lives with hard-bondage were
  bitter. And now bitter bondage you'd try.
  Proscription, and exile, and stern deprivation.
  Beware, Sire! Put by
  That blade in its blood-rusted scabbard. The
  PHARAOHS, the CAESARS have found
  That it wounds him who wields it; and you,
  though your victim there, prone on the ground,
  Look helpless and hopeless, you also shall find
  Persecution a bane
  Which shall lead to a Red Sea of blood to
  o'erwhelm selfish Tyranny's train.
  "Beware!" Tis the shade of MENEPTHA
  that whispers the warning from far.
  Concerning _that_ sword there's a lesson the
  PHARAOH may teach to the TSAR!
       *       *       *       *       *

"REWARDS FOR GALLANTRY."--Among the numerous rewards mentioned in the
_Times_ of last Thursday, the magnificent gold watch, with monogram
in diamonds, presented by the Royal Italian Opera Company to AUGUSTUS
DRURIOLANUS at the close of the present exceptionally successful
season, was not mentioned. Most appropriate present from the persons
up to tune to one who is always up to time. The umble individual who
writes this paragraph only wishes some company--Italian, French, no
matter which--would present _him_ with a golden and diamonded watch.
"O my prophetic soul! My Uncle!!"

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRICE OF IT.

  GLADSTONE'S latest Benedicite
  Is bestowed on "free publicity."
  'Tis the thing that we all strive at,
  Praise in speech, and hate--in private!
  Where are pride, reserve, simplicity?
  Fled for ever--from Publicity!

       *       *       *       *       *

"MORE LIGHT!"--The Berners Hotel Co., with Mr. GEORGE AUGUSTUS SALA
as Chairman, should at once be advertised as "The G.A.S.-Berners Hotel
Co.," and, of course, no electric lighting would be used. Mr. SIMS
REEVES is also a Director of this Hotel Company. So it starts with a
tenner.

       *       *       *       *       *

Socialistic Military Novel. By JAMES ODD SUMMER. _One Iron Soldier,
and the Led Captain._

[Illustration: FROM THE NILE TO THE NEVA.

SHADE OF PHARAOH. "FORBEAR! THAT WEAPON ALWAYS WOUNDS THE HAND THAT
WIELDS IT."]

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. PUNCH'S MORAL MUSIC-HALL DRAMAS.

No. XII.--CONRAD; OR, THE THUMBSUCKER.

_(Adapted freely from a well-known Poem in the "Struwwelpeter.")_

CHARACTERS.

_Conrad (aged 6). Conrad's Mother (47). The Scissorman (age
immaterial)._

SCENE--_An Apartment in the house of_ CONRAD'S _Mother, window in
centre at back, opening upon a quiet thoroughfare. It is dusk, and the
room is lighted only by the reflected gleam from the street lamps._
CONRAD _discovered half-hidden by left window-curtain._

_Conrad (watching street)._ Still there! For full an hour he has not
budged beyond the circle of yon lamp-post's rays! The gaslight falls
upon his crimson hose, and makes a steely glitter at his thigh, while
from the shadow peers a hatchet-face and fixes sinister malignant
eyes--on whom? _(Shuddering.)_ I dare not trust myself to guess! And
yet--ah, no--it cannot be myself! I am so young--one is still young at
six!--What man can say that I have injured him? Since, in my Mother's
absence all the day engaged upon Municipal affairs, I peacefully
beguile the weary hours by suction of consolatory thumbs. _(Here he
inserts his thumb in his mouth, but almost instantly removes it with
a start.)_ Again I meet those eyes! I'll look no more--but draw the
blind and shut my terror out. _(Draws blind and lights candle; Stage
lightens.)_ Heigho, I wish my Mother were at home! _(Listening.)_ At
last. I hear her latchkey in the door!

_Enter_ CONRAD'S Mother, _a lady of strong-minded appearance,
rationally attired. She carries a large reticule full of documents._

_Conrad's M._ Would, CONRAD, that you were of riper years, so you
might share your Mother's joy to-day, the day that crowns her long and
arduous toil as one of London's County Councillors!

_Conrad._ Nay, speak; for though my mind be immature, one topic still
can charm my infant ear, that ever craves the oft-repeated tale. I
love to hear of that august Assembly _(his Mother lifts her bonnet
solemnly)_ in which my Mother's honoured voice is raised!

_C's. M. (gratified)._ Learn, CONRAD, then, that, after many months
of patient "lobbying" (you've heard the term?) the measure by my
foresight introduced has triumphed by a bare majority!

_Con._ My bosom thrills with dutiful delight--although I yet for
information wait as to the scope and purpose of the statute.

_C's. M._ You show an interest so intelligent that well deserves it
should be satisfied. Be seated, CONRAD, at your Mother's knee, and you
shall hear the full particulars. You know how zealously I advocate the
sacred cause of Nursery Reform? How through my efforts every infant's
toys are carefully inspected once a month--?

_Con. (wearily)._ Nay, Mother, you forget--I _have_ no toys.

_C's. M._ Which brings you under the exemption clause. But--to resume;
how Nursery Songs and Tales must now be duly licensed by our Censor,
and any deviation from the text forbidden under heavy penalties? All
that you know. Well; with concern of late, I have remarked among our
infancy the rapid increase of a baneful habit on which I scarce
can bring my tongue to dwell. _(The Stage darker; blind at back
illuminated.)_ Oh, CONRAD, there are children--think of it!--so lost
to every sense of decency that, in mere wantonness or brainless
sloth, they obstinately suck forbidden thumbs! (CONRAD _starts
with irrepressible emotion.)_ Forgive me if I shock your innocence!
_(Sadly.)_ Such things exist--but soon shall cease to be, thanks to
the measure we have passed to-day!

_Con. (with growing uneasiness)._ But how can statutes check such
practices?

_C's M. (patting his head)._ Right shrewdly questioned, boy! I come
to that. Some timid sentimentalists advised compulsory restraint in
woollen gloves, or the deterrent aid of bitter aloes. _I_ saw the evil
had too deep a seat to yield to such half-hearted remedies. No; we
must cut, ere we could hope to cure! Nay, interrupt me not; my Bill
appoints a new official, by the style and title of "London County
Council Scissorman," for the detection of young "suck-a-thumbs."

_[Here the shadow of a huge hand brandishing a gigantic pair of shears
appears upon the blind.]_

_Con. (hiding his face in his Mother's lap)._ Ah, Mother, see!... the
scissors!... On the blind!

_C's. M._ Why, how you tremble! You've no cause to fear. The shadow of
his grim insignia should have no terror--save for thumb-suckers.

_Con._ And what for _them_?

_C's. M. (complacently)._ A doom devised by me--the confiscation of
the culprit thumbs. Thus shall our statute cure while it corrects, for
those who have no thumbs can err no more.

_[The Shadow slowly passes on the blind_, CONRAD _appearing relieved
at its departure. Loud knocking without. Both start to their feet._

_C's M._ Who knocks so loud at such an hour as this?

_A Voice._ Open, I charge ye. In the Council's name!

_C's M._ 'Tis the Official Red-legged Scissorman, who doubtless calls
to thank me for the post.

_Con. (with a gloomy determination)._ More like his business, Madam,
is with--Me!

_C's. M. (suddenly enlightened)._ A Suck-a-thumb?... _you_, CONRAD?

_C. (desperately)._ Ay,--from birth!

_[Profound silence, as Mother and Son face one another. The knocking
is renewed._

_C's. M._ Oh, this is horrible--it must not be! I'll shoot the bolt
and barricade the door.

[CONRAD _places himself before it, and addresses his Mother in a tone
of incisive irony._

_Con._ Why, where is all the zeal you showed of late? is't thus that
you the Roman Matron play? Trick not a statute of your own devising.
Come, your official's waiting--let him in! (C's. M. _shrinks back
appalled._) So? you refuse!--(_throwing open door_)--then--enter,
Scissorman!

_[Enter the_ Scissorman, _masked and in red tights, with his hand upon
the hilt of his shears._

_The S. (in a passionless tone)._ Though sorry to create
unpleasantness, I claim the thumbs of this young gentleman, which my
own eyes have marked between his lips.

_C's. M. (frantically)._ Thou minion of a meddling tyranny, go
exercise thy loathsome trade elsewhere!

_The S. (civilly)._ I've duties here that must be first performed.

_C's. M. (wildly)._ Take my thumbs for his!

_The S._ 'Tis not the law--which is a model of lucidity.

_Con. (calmly)._ Sir, you speak well. My thumbs are forfeited, and
they alone must pay the penalty.

_The S. (with approval)._ Right! Step with me into the outer hall, and
have the business done without delay.

_C's. M. (throwing herself between them)._ Stay! I'm a
Councillor--this law was _mine!_ Hereby I do suspend the clause I
drew.

_The S._ You should have drawn it milder.

_Con._ Must I teach a parent laws were meant to be obeyed? [_To_ Sc.]
Lead on, Sir. _(To his_ Mother _with cold courtesy.)_ Madam,--may I
trouble you?

_[He thrusts her gently aside and passes out with the_ S.; _the door
is shut and fastened from without._ C's. M. _rushes to door which she
attempts to force without success._

_C's. M._ In vain I batter at a senseless door, I'll to the keyhole
train my tortured ear. _(Listening.)_ Dead silence!... is it over--or,
to come? Hark! was not that the click of meeting shears?... Again! and
followed by the sullen thud of thumbs that drop upon linoleum!...

_[The door is opened and_ CONRAD _appears, pale but erect,--N.B. The
whole of this scene has been compared to one in "La Tosca"--which,
however, it exceeds in horror and intensity._

_C's. M._ They send him back to me, bereft of both! My CONRAD!
What?--repulse a Mother's Arms!

_Con. (with chilling composure)._ Yes, Madam, for between us ever
more, a barrier invisible is raised, and should I strive to reach
those arms again, two spectral thumbs would press me coldly back--the
thumbs I sucked, in blissful ignorance, the thumbs that solaced me
in solitude, the thumbs your County Council took from me, and your
endearments scarcely will replace! Where, Madam, lay the harm in
sucking them? The dog will lick his foot, the cat her claw, his paws
sustain the hibernating bear--and you decree no law to punish
_them_! Yet, in your rage for infantine reform, you rushed this most
ridiculous enactment--its earliest victim your neglected son!

[Illustration]

_C's. M. (falling at his feet)._ Say, CONRAD, you will some day pardon
me?

_Con. (bitterly, as he regards his maimed hands.)_ I will,--the day
these pollards send forth shoots!

_[His_ Mother _turns aside with a heartbroken wail_; CONRAD _standing
apart in gloomy estrangement as the Curtain descends._

[Illustration: "RUNNING HIS EYE OVER THEM".

_Colonel North and Lord Dunraven._ "COME ALONG WITH US, GRANDOLPH.
WE'VE GOT A BETTER LOT THAN THAT."]

"RUNNING HIS EYE OVER THEM."


  GRANDOLPH _muses_:--"My Kingdom for a horse!"
  Ah, well!
  The question is,--which _is_ my Kingdom?
  I'm bound to own there _is_ a spell
  In Turfdom, Stabledom, and Ringdom,
  The spell that Lord GEORGE BENTICK knew,
  As DIZZY tells, _I_ feel it too.

  He won brief leadership, who might
  Have won the Derby! Which was better?
  There's rapture in a racer's flight,
  There's rust on the official fetter.
  Of me the Press tells taradiddles!
  Well, I do set the fools strange riddles!

  "Fourth Party!" He was no bad start
  For a new stable, but he's done with.
  "Tory Democracy!" No heart!
  But 'tis a mount I've had good fun with.
  "Leader!" "Economy!" "Sobriety!"
  My Stable has not lacked variety.

  What does NORTH say? A ragged lot?
  Try a new string? And you, DUNRAVEN?
  Humph! Fancy does blow cold and hot.
  Audacious now, and now half craven.
  Well, freak's an unexhausted fount.
  Mentor, can _you_ guess my next mount?

[Illustration: A CAREFUL MAN.

_Host._ "HULLO! WATERING MY CHAMPAGNE! AFRAID OF ITS GETTING INTO
YOUR _HEAD_, I SUPPOSE?"

_Guest._ "No! IT'S NOT MY _HEAD_ I'M AFRAID OF WITH _YOUR_
CHAMPAGNE!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

MY PITHY JAYNE.

    [DR. JAYNE, Bishop of Chester, at a Conference of the Girl's
    Friendly Society, at Chester, said that until they were
    prepared to introduce basket-making into London Society as a
    substitute for quadrilles and waltzes, he was not disposed to
    accept it as an equivalent for balls and dances among girls of
    other classes.]

AIR.--"_My Pretty Jane_."

  My pithy JAYNE, my plucky JAYNE,
  _Punch_ fancies you looked sly
  When you met them, met them down at Chester,
  And gave them "one in the eye."
  Bigotry's waning fast, my boy,
  But Cant we sometimes hear,
  And Chester cant is pestilent cant,
  My Lord, that's pretty clear.
  Then pithy JAYNE, my plucky JAYNE,
  Of smiting don't be shy;
  But meet them, meet the moonstruck Puritans
  And tell them it's all my eye.

  'Tis only play, and harmless play,
  Like kissing in the ring,
  When lads and lasses of spirits gay
  Dance like young lambs in Spring.
  That Spring will wane too fast, alas!
  But while it yet is here,
  Let youth enjoy, or girl or boy,
  The dance to youth so dear.
  Then pithy JAYNE, my plucky JAYNE,
  Don't heed the bigot's cry,
  But meet them, meet them down at Chester
  And teach them Charity!

       *       *       *       *       *

ESSENCE OF PARLIAMENT.

EXTRACTED FROM THE DIARY OF TOBY, M.P.

[Illustration: Turning over fresh Leaves.]

_House of Commons, Monday, July 28._--STRATHEDEN and CAMPBELL are
amongst the most regular visitors to our lobby from House of Lords.
RAVENSWORTH and UMBRELLA run them pretty close, but come in only
a good second. Moreover, whilst RAVENSWORTH and UMBRELLA rarely go
beyond the lobby, STRATHEDEN and CAMPBELL press forward into Gallery
reserved for Peers, and there sweetly go to sleep, "Like Babes in the
Wood," says Colonel MALCOLM, turning over leaves of Orders as if he
would like to complete the simile by acting the part of the birds.
To-night STRATHEDEN and CAMPBELL leave us forlorn. They have business
in their own House; been long concerned for interests of State as
affected by the MARKISS'S persistence in combining office of Premier
with that of Foreign Secretary.

"It would be too much even for us," said STRATHEDEN, in conversation
we had before House met; "and," he continued, "though I say it what
shouldn't, I don't know any arrangement that would be happier or more
complete than if we undertook the job. What do you say, CAMPBELL?
Would you be Premier, or would you take the Foreign Seals?"

"The Premier place is yours," said CAMPBELL, gallantly; "at least,
it is now. When we first started in life we used to call ourselves
CAMPBELL and STRATHEDEN. You'll find it so in the _Peerages_ of
earlier date; now it's the other way about, and STRATHEDEN takes the
_pas_."

"That was entirely your doing, CAMPBELL, said STRATHEDEN; so modest,
so retiring, so thoughtful! After we'd been known as CAMPBELL and
STRATHEDEN for good many years, you came to me and said it was my turn
now. I objected; you insisted; and here we are, a power in the State,
an object of interest in the Commons, STRATHEDEN and CAMPBELL in the
Lords."

"A little awkward, don't you think," I ventured to say, edging in a
word, "for you two fellows to take this strong stand against duality?"

"Not at all," said STRATHEDEN and CAMPBELL, both together; "we are
authorities on the subject, and we say that the MARKISS cannot in his
single person adequately perform the dual duties pertaining to his
high offices; therefore we shall go and move our resolution protesting
against arrangement."

Pretty to see them marching off. Always walk on tip-toe; ROSEBERY says
it is a practice adopted so as not to disturb each other when engaged
in thinking out deep problems; two of the best and the happiest old
fellows in the world; their only trouble is that on divisions their
vote should count as only one. CAMPBELL, in whom hot Cupar blood
flows, once proposed to raise question of privilege, but soothed by
STRATHEDEN, who has in him a strong strain of the diplomatic character
of his grandfather, ABINGER.

_Business done._--In the Lords, STRATHEDEN and CAMPBELL raised
question of MARKISS as Premier and Foreign Secretary. In Commons,
Anglo-German Agreement sanctioned.

_Tuesday._--Scotch Members had their innings to-night; played a pretty
stiff game till, at twelve o'clock, stumps drawn. All about what used
to be called the Compensation Bill. Got a new name now; Compensation
Clauses dropped; but JOKIM finds it dreary work dragging the wreck
along.

"Seems to me, Tony," he said with a sob in his voice, "that whatever
I do is wrong. This Bill has gone through various transmogrifications
since; with a light heart, I brought it in as part of Budget scheme.
But it's all the same. Hit high or hit low, I can't please 'em. Begin
to think if there were any other business open for me, should chuck
this up."

"Ever been in the carpet-cleaning line?" said MAPLE-BLUNDELL, in harsh
voice, and with curiously soured face. Generally beams through life
as if it were all sunshine. Now cloud Seems to have fallen over his
expansive person, and he is as gloomy as JOKIM.

[Illustration: Floored by the Carpet.]

"It's all very well for you," he continues, glowering at JOKIM, "to
complain of your lot; but till you go into the carpet-cleaning line
you never know what vicissitudes mean. One day, alighting from your
four-in-hand, and happily able to spare to Tottenham Court Road a few
moments from direction of national affairs, you look in at your shop;
enter a lady who says she wants a carpet cleaned. 'Very well' you say
rubbing your hands, and smiling blandly; 'and what will be the next
article.' Nothing more. Only this blooming carpet, out of which, when
the job is finished and it is sent home you make a modest five bob.
Your keen insight into figures, JOKIM, will convince you that the coin
colloquially known as five bob won't go far to enable you to cut a
figure in Society, drive four-in-hand, give pic-nics in your park to
the Primrose League, and subscribe to the Canton Fund. However, there
it is; carpet comes; you send it out in usual way, and what happens?
Why it blows itself up, kills two boys, lames a man, and then you
discover that you've been entertaining unawares a carpet worth L1000
which you have to pay. Did that ever happen to you at the Treasury?"
MAPLE-BLUNDELL fiercely demanded. JOKIM forced to admit that his
infinite sorrows had never taken that particular turn.

"Very well, then," snapped MAPLE-BLUNDELL, "don't talk to me about
your troubles. As far as I know this is the only carpet in the world
valued at L1000; it is certainly the only one that ever went off by
spontaneous combustion; and I had this particular carpet in charge, at
the very moment when it was ready to combust spontaneously."

"Yes," said JOKIM, softly, as MAPLE-BLUNDELL went off, viciously
stamping on the carpet that covers the Library floor, "we all have
our troubles, and when I think of MAPLE-BLUNDELL and his combustible
carpet I am able the better to bear the woes I have."

[Illustration: ? ? ?]   _Business done._--In Committee on Local
Taxation Bill.

_Thursday._--"True, TOBY," OLD MORALITY said, in reply to an
observation, "I am a little tired, and naturally; things haven't been
going so well as they did; but I could get along well enough if it
wasn't for SUMMERS. CONEYBEARE'S cantankerous; STORY is strenuous;
TANNER tedious; and DILLON denunciatory. But there's something about
SUMMERS that is peculiarly aggravating. In the first place, he is, as
far as appearances go, such a quiet, amiable, inoffensive young man.
Looking at him, one would think that butter wouldn't melt in his
mouth, much less that Mixed Marriages in Malta should keep him awake
at night, and the question of International Arbitration should lower
his appetite. Yet you know how it is. He seems to have some leisure
on his hands; uses it to formulate conundrums; comes down here, and
propounds them to me. Just look at his list for to-night.
LINTORN SIMMONDS'S Mission to the POPE; Customs' Duty in Algeria;
International Arbitration; Walfish Bay, and Damara Land, together with
the view the Cape Colonies may take of the Anglo-German Agreement.
That pretty well for one night; but he's gone off now, to look up a
fresh batch, which he'll unfold to-morrow. Now is the winter of our
discontent, which is chilly enough; but, for my part, I often think
that life would be endurable only for its SUMMERS."

Haven't often heard OLD MORALITY speak so bitterly; generally, even at
worst time, overflowing with geniality; ready to take kindest view of
circumstances, and hope for the best. But SUMMERS, surveying mankind
from China to Peru in search of material for fresh conundrum, too much
for mildest-mannered man. OLD MORALITY, goaded to verge of madness,
jumps up; hotly declines to reply to SUMMERS; begs him to address his
questions to Ministers to whose Department they belonged.

_Business done._--Local Taxation Bill through Committee.

_Friday._--Still in our ashes live our wonted fires. Dwelling just now
amid ashes of expiring Session; everything dull and deadly; pounding
away at Local Taxation Bill; Scotch Members to the fore, for the
fortieth time urging that the L40,000 allotted them in relief of
school fees shall be made L90,000. House divides, and also for
fortieth time says "No;" expect to go on with next Amendment; when
suddenly HARCOURT springs on OLD MORALITY'S back, digs his knuckles
into his eyes, bites his ear, and observes that he "has never seen a
piece of more unexampled insolence." OLD MORALITY, when he recovers
breath, goes and tells the Master--I mean the SPEAKER. SPEAKER says
HARCOURT shouldn't use language like that; so HARCOURT subsides, and
incident closes as rapidly and suddenly as it opened.

A little later COMPTON goes for RAIKES; hints that he sub-edited
for _Hansard_ portions of a speech delivered in House on Post Office
affairs. RAIKES says "Noble Lord charged me with having deliberately
falsified my speech." COMPTON says he didn't. "Then," said RAIKES,
with pleading voice that went to every heart, "I wish the Noble Lord
had the manliness to charge me with deliberate falsification." COMPTON
refused to oblige; RAIKES really depressed.

"Don't know what we're coming to, TOBY," he said, "when one almost
goes on his knees to ask a man to charge him with deliberate
falsification, and he won't do it. Thought better of COMPTON; see him
in his true light now." _Business done._--A good deal.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SPORTING STYLE.

Our next example of a true sporting style will be constructed on
the basis of Nos. 11, 12, and 13 of the Rules. These, it will be
remembered, require the writer to refer to "the good old days;" to be
haughty and contemptuous, with a parade of rugged honesty; to be vain
and offensive, and to set himself up as an infallible judge of every
branch of sport and athletics. This particular variety of style is
always immensely effective. All the pot--boys of the Metropolis, most
of the shady bookmakers, and a considerable proportion of the patrons
of sport swear by it, and even the most thoughtful who read it cannot
fail to be impressed by its splendour. This style deals in paragraphs.
_Second Example._--Event to be commented on: A Regatta.

I am led to believe by column upon column of wishy-washy twaddle in
the morning papers, that Henley Regatta has actually taken place. The
effete parasites of a decayed aristocracy who direct this gathering
endeavour year after year to make the world believe that theirs is
the only meeting at which honour has the least chance of bursting
into flower. I have my own opinions on this point. Really, these tenth
transmitters of foolish faces become more and more brazen in their
attempts to palm off their miserable two-penny-halfpenny, tin-pot,
one-horse Regatta as the combination of all the cardinal virtues.

       *       *       *       *       *short

These gentry presume to dictate to rowing men what shall constitute
the status of the Amateur. For my own part (and the world will
acknowledge that I have done some rowing in my time) I prefer the
straight-forward conduct of any passing rag-and-bone merchant to the
tricks of the high and mighty champions of the amateur qualification
in whose nostrils the mere name of professional oarsman seems
to stink. These pampered denizens of the amateur hothouse would,
doubtless, wear a kid-glove before they ventured to shake hands with
one who, like myself, despises them and their absurd pretensions.

       *       *       *       *       *short

As for the rowing, it was fantastic. I wasn't there. Indeed, those who
know me, would never think so meanly of me as to suppose that I would
attend this Regatta _pour rire_. But I know enough to be sure that the
Eights were slow, the Fours deficient in pace, the pairs on the minus
side of nothing, and the scullers preposterous. Rowing must be in a
bad way when it can boast no better champions (save the mark!) than
those who last week aired their incompetence, and impeded the traffic
of the people upon the Thames. Time was when an oarsman was an
oarsman, but now he is a miserable cross between a Belgravian flunkey
and a riverside tout. Which is all I care to say on an unsavoury
matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

--> NOTICE.--Rejected Communications or Contributions, whether MS.,
Printed Matter, Drawings, or Pictures of any description, will in no
case be returned, not even when accompanied by a Stamped and Addressed
Envelope, Cover, or Wrapper. To this rule there will be no exception.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol.
99, August 9, 1890., by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PUNCH ***

***** This file should be named 12825.txt or 12825.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/2/12825/

Produced by Malcolm Farmer, Sandra Brown and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
