Project Gutenberg's Good Stories from the Ladies Home Journal, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Good Stories from The Ladies Home Journal

Author: Various

Release Date: July 7, 2004 [EBook #12836]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOOD STORIES ***




Produced by Al Haines





GOOD STORIES

REPRINTED FROM

THE LADIES' HOME JOURNAL

OF PHILADELPHIA




1907



GOOD STORIES

from THE LADIES' HOME JOURNAL




_Warding Off a Catastrophe_

A fat woman entered a crowded street car and, seizing a strap, stood
directly in front of a man seated in the corner.  As the car started
she lunged against his newspaper and at the same time trod heavily on
his toes.

As soon as he could extricate himself he rose and offered her his seat.

"You are very kind, sir," she said, panting for breath.

"Not at all, madam," he replied; "it's not kindness; it's simply
self-defense."



_Not What She Expected_

A charming, well-preserved widow had been courted and won by a
physician.  She had children.  The wedding-day was approaching, and it
was time the children should know they were to have a new father.
Calling one of them to her she said: "Georgie, I am going to do
something before long that I would like to talk about with you."

"What is it, Ma ?" aiked the boy.

"I am intending to marry Doctor Jones in a few days, and----"

"Bully for you.  Ma, Does Doctor Jones know it ?"



_Of Course_

The morning class had been duly instructed and enlightened upon the
subject of our national independence.  Feeling sure she had made a
real and lasting impression with her explanations and blackboard
illustrations the young teacher began with the usual round of
questions:

"Now, Sammy Smith, where was the Declaration of Independence signed?"

Sammy, with a shout of glee: "At de bottom, ma'am--that's what you
said!"



_He Had Certainly Met Him_

A traveler going to New Zealand was asked by a friend if he would
inquire, while there, as to the whereabouts of the friend's
grandfather, Jeremiah Thompson.

"Certainly," said the traveler, and wherever he went he asked for news
of the ancestor, but without avail.

One day he was introduced to a fine old Maori of advanced age.  "Did
you ever meet with an Englishman named Jeremiah Thompson?" he asked.

A smile passed over the Maori's face.  "Meet him?" he repeated.  "Why,
I ate him!"



_No Place Like Home_

A Bostonian died, and when he arrived at St. Peter's gate he was asked
the usual questions:

"What is your name, and where are you from ?"

The answer was, "Mr. So-and-So, from Boston."

"You may come in," said St. Peter, "but I know you won't like it."



_She Felt Bad When Well_

An old lady, really quite well, was always complaining and "enjoying
poor health," as she expressed it.  Her various ailments were to her
the most interesting topic in the world.  One day a neighbor found her
eating a hearty meal, and asked her how she was.

"Poor me," she sighed, "I feel very well, but I always feel bad when I
feel well, because I know I am going to feel worse afterward."



_Drove Him Mad_

They took him to the sanatorium moaning feebly: "Thirty-nine,
thirty-nine."

"What does he mean by that?" the attendant inquired.

"It's the number of buttons on the back of his wife's new frock," the
family doctor explained.



_Tweedledum or Tweedledee_

Joseph Chamberlain was the guest of honor at a dinner in an important
city.  The Mayor presided, and when coffee was being served the Mayor
leaned over and touched Mr. Chamberlain, saying, "Shall we let the
people enjoy themselves a little longer, or had we better have your
speech now?"



_It Was Mary's Own Idea_

"Did you mail my letter, Mary?" asked her mistress.  "It was an
important one, you know."

"Yis, mum, indeed I did."

"But why have you brought back the two cents I gave you for the stamp?"

"Sure, I didn't have to use it, mum," replied Mary.  "I slipped th'
letther into th' box whin nobody was lukin'."



_He Couldn't Very Well_

A husband was being arraigned in court in a suit brought by his wife
for cruelty.

"I understand, sir," said the Judge, addressing the husband, "that one
of the indignities you have showered upon your wife is that you have
not spoken to her for three years.  Is that so?"

"It is, your Honor," quickly answered the husband.

"Well, sir," thundered the judge, "why didn't you speak to her, may I
ask?"

"Simply," replied the husband, "because I didn't want to interrupt
her."



_A Coat That Wouldn't Come Off_

The inspector asked the boys of the school he was examining: "Can you
take your warm overcoats aff?"  "Yes, sir," was the response.  "Can
the bear take his warm overcoat off?"  "No, sir."  "Why not?"  There
was silence for a while, and then a little boy spoke up: "Please, sir,
because God alone knows where the buttons are."



_The Young Housewife's Latest_

In the cook's absence the young mistress of the house undertook, with
the help of a green waitress, to get the Sunday luncheon.  The
flurried maid, who had been struggling in the kitchen with a coffee
machine that refused to work, confessed that she had forgotten to wash
the lettuce.

"Well, never mind, Eliza.  Go on with the coffee, and I'll do it,"
said the considerate mistress.  "Where do you keep the soap?"



_He Did His Best_

A hungry Irishman went into a restaurant on Friday and said to the
waiter:

"Have yez any whale?"

"No."

"Have yez any shark?"

"No."

"Have yez any swordfish?"

"No."

"Have yez any jellyfish?"

"No."

"All right," said the Irishman. "Then bring me ham and eggs and a
beefsteak smothered wid onions.  The Lord knows I asked for fish."



_The Power Behind_

At a prayer-meeting a good old brother stood up and said he was glad
to give the following testimony:

"My wife and I," he said, "started in life with hardly a cent in the
world.  We began at the lowest round of the ladder, but the Lord has
been good to us and we have worked up--we have prospered.  We bought a
little farm and raised good crops.  We have a good home and a nice
family of children, and," he added with much emphasis, "I am the head
of that family."

After he sat down his wife promptly arose to corroborate all that he
had said.  She said that they had started in life with hardly a cent,
the Lord had been good to them and they had prospered; they did have a
farm and good crops, and it was true they did have a fine family of
children.  But she added with satisfaction, "I am the neck that moves
the head."



_Easy Enough_

Some visitors who were being shown over a pauper lunatic asylum, says
"Harper's Weekly," inquired of their guide what method was employed to
discover when the inmates were sufficiently recovered to leave.

"Well," replied he, "you see, it's this way.  We have a big trough of
water, and we turns on the tap.  We leave it running, and tells 'em to
bail out the water with pails until they've emptied the trough."

"How does that prove it?" asked one of the visitors.

"Well," said the guide, "them as ain't idiots turns off the tap."



_He Had Left the Cards All Right_

The high-born dame was breaking in a new footman--stupid but honest.

In her brougham, about to make a round of visits, she found she had
forgotten her bits of pasteboard.  So she sent the man back with
orders to bring some of her cards that were on the mantelpiece in her
boudoir, and put them in his pocket.

At different houses, she told the footman to hand in one, and
sometimes a couple, until at last she told Jeames to leave three at
one house.

"Can't do it, mum."

"How's that?"

"I've only got two left--the ace of spades and the seven of clubs."



_And That Settled It_

"If ye please, mum," said the ancient hero, in an appealing voice, as
he stood at the back door of the cottage on washday, "I've lost my
leg----"

"Well, I ain't got it," snapped the woman fiercely,

And the door closed with a bang.



_What Do You Think the Porter Did_?

A lady in the centre seat of the parlor car heard the request of a
fellow-passenger directly opposite asking the porter to open the
window, and, scenting a draft, she immediately drew a cloak about her.

"Porter, if that window is opened," she snapped testily, "I shall
freeze to death."

"And if the window is kept closed," returned the other passenger, "I
shall surely suffocate."

The poor porter stood absolutely puzzled between the two fires.

"Say, boss," he finally said to a commercial traveler seated near by,
"what would you do?"

"Do?" echoed the traveler.  "Why, man, that is a very simple matter;
open the window and freeze one lady.  Then close it and suffocate the
other."



_She Said It_

A visitor of noble birth was expected to arrive at a large country
house in the North of England, and the daughter of the house, aged
seven, was receiving final instructions from her mother.

"And now, dear," she said, "when the Duke speaks to you do not forget
always to say 'your Grace.'"

Presently the great man arrived, and after greeting his host and
hostess he said to the child, "Well, my dear, and what is your name?"
Judge of his surprise when the little girl solemnly closed her eyes
and with clasped hands exclaimed, "For what we are about to receive
may we be truly fankful, amen."



_His Idea of Genius_

A young man once said to Thomas A. Edison, the inventor; "Mr. Edison,
don't you believe that genius is inspiration?"

"No," replied Edison; "genius is _per_spiration."



_Took the Wrong House_

On one of the Southern railroads there is a station-building that is
commonly known by travelers as the smallest railroad station in
America.  It is of this station that the story is told that an old
farmer was expecting a chicken-house to arrive there, and he sent one
of his hands, a newcomer, to fetch it.  Arriving there the man saw the
house, loaded it on to his wagon and started for home.  On the way he
met a man in uniform with the words "Station Agent" on his cap.

"Say, hold on.  What have you got on that wagon?" he asked.

"My chicken-house, of course," was the reply.

"Chicken-house be jiggeredl" exploded the official.  "That's the
station!"



_And Tommy Did_

"And now," said the teacher, "I want Tommy to tell the school who was
most concerned when Absalom got hung by the hair ?"

TOMMY: "Abs'lom."



_The Prayer of Cyrus Brown_

  "The proper way for a man to pray,"
    Said Deacon Lemuel Keyes,
  "And the only proper attitude,
    Is down upon his knees."

  "No, I should say the way to pray,"
    Said Reverend Doctor Wise,
  "Is standing straight, with outstretched arms,
    And rapt and upturned eyes."

  "Oh, no; no, no," said Elder Slow,
    "Such posture is too proud:
  A man should pray with eyes fast closed
    And head contritely bowed."

  "It seems to me his hands should be
    Austerely clasped in front,
  With both thumbs pointing toward the ground,"
    Said Reverend Doctor Blunt.

  "Las' year I fell in Hodgkin's well
  Head first," said Cyrus Brown,
  "With both my heels a-stickin' up,
  My head a-p'inting down,

  "An' I made a prayer right then an' there--
  Best prayer I ever said,
  The prayingest prayer I ever prayed,
  A-standing on my head."

    --SAM WALTER FOSS.



_Couldn't Tell Which_

Jones had come home later than usual and had ready a good explanation,
but his wife gave him no chance, and immediately began to tell him
what she thought of him.  He endured it patiently all evening, quietly
read his paper and went to bed.  His wife was still talking.

When he was almost asleep he could hear her still scolding him
unmercifully.  He dropped off to sleep and awoke after a couple of
hours, only to hear his wife remark:

"I hope all the women don't have to put up with such conduct as this."

"Annie," said Jones, "are you talking again or yet?"



_The Greater Calamity_

Two or three urchins were running down a long and very steep flight of
steps, when the foremost stumbled and fell headlong twenty to thirty
feet, and was only stopped near the bottom by doubling backward around
the newel-post.  It looked as though his back was broken, and that he
was a dead small boy, but he gathered himself up, thrust his hands
anxiously in his trousers' pockets, and ejaculated;

"B' gosh, I b'l'eve I lost a cent."



_Her First Railroad Ride_

An old lady in Missouri took her first railroad trip last week, says
"The Butter Democrat."  She noticed the bell-cord overhead, and,
turning to a boy, she said: "Sonny, what's that for?"  "That, marm,"
he said, with a mischievous twinkle in his eye, "is to ring the bell
when you want something to eat."

Shortly afterward the old lady reached her umbrella up to the cord and
gave it a vigorous pull.  The train was in the middle of a trestle.
The whistle sounded, the brakes were pulled on, the train began to
slacken its speed, windows were thrown up, questions asked, and
confusion reigned among the passengers.  The old lady sat calmly
through it all.

Presently the conductor came running through the train and asked: "Who
pulled the bell?"

"I did," replied the old lady meekly.

"Well, what do you want?" asked the conductor impatiently.

"Well," said the old lady meditatively, "you may bring me a ham
sandwich and a cup of tea, please."



_The Parson and the "Light"_

A parson had had a call from a little country parish to a large and
wealthy one in a big city.  He asked time for prayer and
consideration.  He did not feel sure of his light.  A month passed.
Some one met hie youngest son.  "How is it, Josiah; is your father
going to B------?"

"Well," answered the youngster judicially, "paw is still prayin' for
light, but most of the things is packed."



_Turn About is Fair Play_

Last Christmas a middle-aged tinplate-worker married a widow whose
acquaintance he had made but a few weeks before while working some
little distance away from home.

"Sarrah," he said nervously, after the guests had departed, "I 'ave a
weddin' present for ye."

"What is it, John?" said Sarrah with a smirk.

"I 'ope ye won't be 'fended, Sarrah," said John, more agitated than
ever, "but it is--er--er--it is five of 'em."

"Five of wat?" asked Sarrah.

"Five children!" blurted out John desperately, anticipating a scene.
"I didn't tell ye I 'ad children--five of 'em."

Sarrah took the news quite calmly; in fact, she appeared relieved.

"Oh, well, John," she said, "that do make it easier for me to tell ye.
Five is not so bad as me, watever.  Seven I 'ave got!"

"Wat!" howled John.

"Seven," repeated Sarrah composedly.  "That is my weddin' present to
ye, John."



_His Only Chance_

"Is there a man in all this audience," demanded the female lecturer on
woman's rights, "that has ever done anything to lighten the burden on
his wife's shoulders?  What do you know of woman's work?  Is there a
man here," she continued, folding her arms, and looking over the
assembly with superb scorn, "that has ever got up in the morning,
leaving his tired, worn-out wife to enjoy her slumbers, gone quietly
downstairs, made the fire, cooked his own breakfast, sewed the missing
buttons on the children's clothes, darned the family stockings,
scoured the pots and kettles, cleaned and filled the lamps, and done
all this, if necessary, day after day, uncomplainingly?  If there be
such a man in this audience let him rise up!  I should really like to
see him!"

And, in the rear of the hall, a mild-looking man in spectacles, in
obedience to the summons, timidly arose.  He was the husband of the
eloquent speaker.  It was the first time he had ever had a chance to
assert himself.



_He Saw Them, All Right_

Two officers were sent to arrest a Quaker; his wife met them at the
door and said, "Walk in, gentlemen; my husband will see thee."

After waiting some time they got impatient and called the woman,
saying, "You said we should see your husband presently."

"No, friend," she replied; "I said he would see thee--he did see thee,
did not like thy looks, and went out by the back door."



_An Easy Way to Stop It_

William Penn was once urging a man he knew to stop drinking to excess,
when the man suddenly asked:

"Can you tell me of an easy way to do it?"

"Yes," Penn replied readily, "it is just as easy as to open thy hand,
friend."

"Convince me of that," the man exclaimed, "and I will promise upon my
honor to do as you tell me."

"Well, my friend," Penn answered, "whenever thee finds a glass of
liquor in thy hand, open that hand before the glass touches thy lips,
and thee will never drink to excess again."

The man was so struck by the simplicity of the great Quaker's advice
that he followed it and reformed.



_What Brought Them_?

A rural school has a pretty girl as its teacher, but she was much
troubled because many of her pupils were late every morning.  At last
she made the announcement that she would kiss the first pupil to
arrive at the schoolhouse the next morning.  At sunrise the largest
three boys of her class were sitting on the doorstep of the
schoolhouse, and by six o'clock every boy in the school and four of
the directors were waiting for her to arrive.



_Give and Take_

An English statesman on one occasion, when engaged in canvassing,
visited a working-man's house, in the principal room of which a
pictorial representation of the Pope faced an illustration of King
William, of pious and immortal memory, in the act of crossing the
Boyne.

The worthy man stared in amazement, and seeing his surprise the
voter's wife exclaimed;

"Shure, my husband's an Orangeman and I'm a Catholic."

"How do you get on together?" asked the astonished politician.

"Very well, indade, barring the twelfth of July, when my husband goes
out with the Orange procession and comes home feelin' extry
pathriotic."

"What then?"

"Well, he always takes the Pope down and jumps on him and then goes
straight to bed.  The next morning I get up early, before he is awake,
and take down King William and pawn him and buy a new Pope with the
money.  Then I give the old man the ticket to get King William out."



_Too Much of a Good Thing_

"I've got the very thing you want," said the stableman to a ruralist
in search of a horse; "a thorough-going road horse.  Five years old,
sound as a quail, $175 cash down, and he goes ten miles without
stopping."

The purchaser threw his hands skyward.

"Not for me," he said, "not for me.  I wouldn't gif you five cents for
him.  I live eight miles out in de country, und I'd haf to walk back
two miles."



_Had Missed It_

"What are you crying for, my poor little boy?" said a man to a crying
boy.

"Pa fell downstairs."

"Don't take on so, my boy.  He'll get better soon."

"That isn't it.  Sister saw him fall--all the way.  I never saw
nuffen."



_Denied the Only Shade_

It was a broiling hot day in the park, and those walking therein were
well-nigh exhausted, when a very stout old lady came bustling along
one of the paths, closely followed by a rough-looking tramp.

Twice she commanded him to leave her, but Still he followed just
behind.

At last the old lady, quite disgusted, turned angrily around and said:

"Look here, my man, if you don't go away I shall call a policeman."

The poor fellow looked up at her with a tear in his eye, and then
remarked:

"For goodness' sake, mum, have mercy and don't call a policeman, for
ye're the on'y shady spot in the park."



_Wanted to Make Her Happy_

In one of the many hospitals in the South a bright, busy-looking and
duty-loving woman hustled up to one of the wounded soldiers who lay
gazing at the ceiling above his cot.  "Can't I do something for you,
my poor fellow?" said the woman imploringly.  The "poor fellow" looked
up languidly.  The only things he really wanted just at that time were
his discharge and a box of cigars.  When he saw the strained and
anxious look on the good woman's face, however, he felt sorry for her,
and with perfect sang froid he replied: "Why, yes; you can wash my
face if you want to."

"I'd be only too glad to," gasped the visitor eagerly.

"All right," said the cavalier gallantly, "go ahead.  It's been washed
twenty-one times already to-day, but I don't mind going through it
again if it'll make you any happier."



_Easy Enough_

A noted mathematician, considered by many a wonder, stopped at a hotel
in a small town in Missouri.  As usual, in such places, there were a
number of drummers on hand; there was also a meeting of some medical
men at the place, who used the hotel as headquarters.  One of the
doctors thought it would be quite a joke to tell the mathematician
that some of the M.D.'s had concluded to kidnap him and take out his
brains to learn how it was he was so good in mathematics.  He was then
asked by them what he was going to do about it.  He replied: "Why, I
shall simply go on without brains just as you doctors are doing."



_Not a Complaint at All_

The good priest had come to his parishioner after the funeral of the
latter's mother-in-law to express condolences.

"And what complaint was it, Pat," he asked sympathetically, "that
carried the old lady off?"

"Kumplaint, did yi ask, father?" answered Pat.  "Thir wuz no kumplaint
from anybody.  Everybody wuz satisfied."



_He Caught It, But_----

The ferry-dock was crowded with weary homegoers when through the crowd
rushed a man--hot, excited, laden to the chin with bundles of every
shape and size.  He sprinted down the pier, his eyes fixed on a
ferryboat only two or three feet out from the pier.  He paused but an
instant on the string-piece, and then, cheered on by the amused crowd,
he made a flying leap across the intervening stretch of water and
landed safely on the deck.  A fat man happened to be standing on the
exact spot on which he struck, and they both went down with a
resounding crash.  When the arriving man had somewhat recovered his
breath he apologized to the fat man.  "I hope I didn't hurt you," he
said.  "I am sorry.  But, anyway, I caught the boat!"

"But, you idiot," said the fat man, "the boat was coming in!"



_He Didn't Mind_

A certain railway in Michigan has a station entitled Sawyer's Mills,
but usually entitled, for short, Sawyer's.

A rural couple on one of the trains attracted much attention by their
evident fondness for each other until the brakeman thrust his head in
the doorway of the car and called out, "Sawyer! Sawyer!"

"Reuben" suddenly assumed the perpendicular and indignantly exclaimed,
"Well, I don't care if you did; we've been engaged three weeks."



_He Announced His Intentions_

Young man and his lady-love attended a protracted meeting which was
being held in the village church.  Arriving late they found the church
filled, but a gentleman arose and gave the lady his seat, while the
young man was ushered far away to a seat in another part of the
building.

The service grew warm and impressive.

"Will those who want our prayers please stand up?" said the preacher.

At this juncture the young man thought it was getting late and he
would get his sweetheart and go home, but not just knowing where she
sat he rose to his feet and looked over the audience.

The minister, mistaking his intentions, asked: "Young man, are you
seeking salvation?"

To which the young man responded: "At present I am seeking Sal
Jackson!"



_As a Last Resort_

"Well, doctor," said the patient who was an incessant talker, "why in
the world don't you look at my tongue, if you want to, instead of
writing away like a newspaper editor?  How long do you expect I am
going to sit here with my mouth wide open?"

"Just one moment more, please, madam," replied the doctor; "I only
wanted you to keep still long enough so that I could write this
prescription."



_He Got the Information_

At a country fair a machine which bore a sign reading, "How to Make
Your Trousers Last," occupied a prominent position in the grounds and
attracted much attention, says "Harper's Weekly."  A countryman who
stood gaping before it was told by the exhibitor, a person with a long
black mustache, a minstrel-stripe shirt, and a ninety-four-carat
diamond in a red cravat, that for one cent deposited in the slot the
machine would dispense its valuable sartorial advice.  The countryman
dug the required coin from the depths of a deep pocket and dropped it
in the slot.  Instantly the machine delivered a card on which was
neatly printed:

"Make your coat and waistcoat first."



_After Many Trials_

He WAS a sad-faced American tourist, and as he seated himself in a
London restaurant he was immediately attended by an obsequious waiter.

"I want two eggs," said the American--"one fried on one side and one
on the other."

"'Ow is that, sir ?" asked the astounded waiter.

"Two eggs--one fried on one side and one on the other."

"Very well, sir."

The waiter was gone several minutes, and when he returned his face was
a study.

"Would you please repeat your border, sir?"

"I said, very distinctly, two eggs--one fried on one side and one on
the other."

Oppressive silence, and then a dazed "Very well, sir."

This time he was gone longer, and when he returned he said anxiously:

"Would it be awsking too much, sir, to 'ave you repeat your border,
sir?  I cawn't think I 'ave it right, sir, y'know."

"Two eggs," said the American sadly and patiently--"one fried on one
side and one on the other."

More oppressive silence and another and fainter "Very well, sir."

This time he was gone still longer.  When he returned his collar was
unbuttoned, his hair disheveled and his face scratched and bleeding.
Leaning over the waiting patron he whispered beseechingly:

"Would you mind tyking boiled heggs, sir?  I've 'ad some words with
the cook."



_It Was His Only Tie_

One morning, as Mark Twain returned from a neighborhood morning call,
sans necktie, his wife met him at the door with the exclamation;
"There, Sam, you have been over to the Stowes's again without a
necktie!  It's really disgraceful the way you neglect your dress!"

Her husband said nothing, but went up to his room.

A few minutes later his neighbor--Mrs. S.--was summoned to the door by
a messenger, who presented her with a small box neatly done up.  She
opened it and found a black silk necktie, accompanied by the following
note:

"Here is a necktie.  Take it out and look at it.  I think I stayed
half an hour this morning.  At the end of that time will you kindly
return it, as it is the only one I have?--MARK TWAIN."



Playing Doctor

BILLY: "Gentlemen, before we begin to operate, if you will hold the
patient's hands and feet I'll get that four cents out of his
right-hand pocket."



_The Feminine Point of View_

The Willoughbys had said good-by to Mrs. Kent.  Then Mr. Willoughby
spoke thoughtfully:

"It was pleasant of her to say that about wishing she could see more
of people like us, who are interested in real things, instead of the
foolish round of gayety that takes up so much of her time and gives
her so little satisfaction, wasn't it?"

His wife stole a sidewise glance at his gratified face, and a
satirical smile crossed her own countenance.

"Very pleasant, George," she said clearly.  "But what I knew she
meant, and what she knew that I knew she meant, was that my
walking-skirt is an inch too long and my sleeves are old style, and
your coat, poor dear, is beginning to look shiny in the back."

"Why--what--how----" began Mr. Willoughby helplessly; then he shook
his head and gave it up.



_He Had Faith in the Doctor_

A young English laborer went to the register's office to record his
father's death.  The register asked the date of death.

"Well, father ain't dead yet," was the reply; "but he will be dead
before morning, and I thought it would save me another trip if you
would put it down now."

"Oh, that won't do at all," said the register.  "Why, your father may
be well before morning."

"Ah, no, he won't," said the young laborer.  "Our doctor says he
won't, and he knows what he's given father."



_What He Used the Milk For_

A clergyman had been for some time displeased with the quality of milk
served him.  At length he determined to remonstrate with his milkman
for supplying such weak stuff.  He began mildly:

"I've been wanting to see you in regard to the quality of milk with
which you are serving me."

"Yes, sir," uneasily answered the tradesman.

"I only wanted to say," continued the minister, "that I use the milk
for drinking purposes exclusively, and not for christening."



_Nothing if Not Polite_

An interested visitor who was making the final call in the tenement
district, rising, said:

"Well, my good woman, I must go now.  Is there anything I can do for
you?"

"No, thank ye, mem," replied the submerged one.  "Ye mustn't mind it
if I don't return the call, will ye?  I haven't any time to go slummm'
meself."



_Her Little Game_

As a married couple were walking down one of the main thoroughfares of
a city the husband noted the attention which other women obtained from
passers-by, and remarked to his better half:

"Folks never look at you.  I wish I had married some one better
looking."

The woman tartly replied: "It's your fault.  Do you think a man will
stare at me when you're walking with me?  You step behind and see
whether men don't look at me."

The husband hung back about a dozen yards, and for the length of the
street was surprised to see every man his wife passed stare hard at
her and even turn around and look after her.

"Sure, lassie!" he exclaimed as he rejoined her, "I was wrong and take
it back.  I'll never say aught about your looks again."

The wife had made a face at every man she met.



_A Case of Adaptation_

Two dusky small boys were quarreling; one was pouring forth a volume
of vituperous epithets, while the other leaned against a fence and
calmly contemplated him.  When the flow of language was exhausted he
said;

"Are you troo?"

"Yes."

"You ain't got nuffin' more to say?"

"No."

"Well, all dem tings what you called me you is."



_What Would Happen_

A woman agitator, holding forth on the platform and presenting the
greatness other sex, cried out: "Take away woman and what would
follow?"

And from the audience came a clear, male voice: "We would."



_Couldn't Fool Him That Far_

Years ago, when telephones were still a novelty, a farmer came to town
one day and called on a lawyer friend of his whom he supplied with
butter, and who had had a telephone recently put in his office.

"Need any butter this morning?" asked the farmer.

"Well, I don't know," answered the lawyer.  "Wait a minute.  I'll ask
my wife about it."

After speaking through the 'phone he went on; "No; my wife says no."

The farmer's face was a study for a moment.  Then he broke out with:
"Look-a-here, Mr. Lawyer, I may be a 'Rube' and have my whiskers full
of hay and hayseed, but I'm not such a big fool as to believe that
your wife is in that box!"



_And They Wondered_!

At a banquet held in a room, the walls of which were adorned with many
beautiful paintings, a well-known college president was called upon to
respond to a toast.  In the course of his remarks, wishing to pay a
compliment to the ladies present, and designating the paintings with
one of his characteristic gestures, he said: "What need is there of
these painted beauties when we have so many with us at this table?"



_She Had Him That Time_

It was the same old story of a man who refused to tell his wife the
outcome of a business transaction in which, naturally, she took a deep
interest.

"No," he sneered, "I won't tell you.  If I did you'd repeat it.  You
women can never keep a secret."

"John," said the woman quietly, "have I ever told the secret about the
solitaire engagement ring you gave me eighteen years ago being paste?"



_Necessity: Not Choice_

A woman hurried up to a policeman at the corner of Twenty-third Street
in New York City.

"Does this crosstown car take you down to the Bridge toward Brooklyn?"
she demanded.

"Why, madam," returned the policeman, "do you want to go to Brooklyn?"

"No, I don't want to" the woman replied, "but I have to."



_Mr. Beecher's Prescription_

A country clergyman once called on Mr. Beecher and asked his advice
about what to do with persons who go to sleep in church.

"Well," said Mr. Beecher, "I'll tell you what I do.  When I first came
to Plymouth Church I gave the sexton strict orders that if he saw any
person asleep in my congregation he should go straight to the pulpit
and wake up the minister."



_A Recipe for a Bridal Couple_

It was on a train going through Indiana.  Among the passengers was a
newly-married couple, who made themselves known Co such an extent that
the occupants of the car commenced passing sarcastic remarks about
them.  The bride and groom stood the remarks for some time, but
finally the latter, who was a man of tremendous size, broke out in the
following language at his tormentors: "Yes, we're married--just
married.  We are going one hundred and sixty miles farther, and I am
going to 'spoon' all the way.  If you don't like it you can get out
and walk.  She's my violet and I'm her sheltering oak."

During the remainder of the journey they were left in peace.



_Both of the Same Kind_

A lady stepped from the Limited Express at a side station, on a
special stop order.  To the only man in sight she asked:

"When is the train for Madison due here, please?"

"The train went an hour ago, ma'am: the next one is to-morrow at eight
o'clock."

The lady in perplexity then asked:

"Where is the nearest hotel?"

"There is no hotel here at all," replied the man.

"But what shall I do?" asked the lady.  "Where shall I spend the
night?"

"I guess you'll have to stay all night with the station agent," was
the reply.

"Sir!" flashed up the lady, "I'd have you know I'm a lady."

"Well," said the man as he strode off, "so is the station agent."



"_Follow the Leader_"

A young curate was asked to take a Sunday-school class of girls of
eighteen or nineteen years each, which had formerly been taught by a
lady.  The young clergyman consented, but insisted upon being properly
introduced to the class.  The superintendent accordingly took him to
the class for this purpose and said:

"Young ladies, I introduce to you Mr. Chase, who will in future be
your teacher.  I would like you to tell him what your former teacher
did each Sunday so that he can go on in the same way.  What did she
always do first?"

And then a miss of sixteen said: "Kiss us."



_Very Easily Explained_

A neighbor whose place adjoined Bronson Alcott's had a vegetable
garden in which he took a great interest.  Mr. Alcott had one also,
and both men were especially interested in their potato patches.  One
morning, meeting by the fence, the neighbor said, "How is it, Mr.
Alcott, you are never troubled with bugs, while my vines are crowded
with them?"

"My friend, that is very easily explained," replied Mr. Alcott.  "I
rise very early in the morning, gather all the bugs from my vines and
throw them into your yard."



_Proved His Teacher Wrong_

Little Willie's father found his youthful son holding up one of his
rabbits by the ears and saying to him: "How much is seven times seven,
now?"

"Bah," the father heard the boy say, "I knew you couldn't.  Here's
another one.  Six times six is how much?"

"Why, Willie, what in the world are you doing with your rabbit?" asked
the father.

Willie threw the rabbit down with disgust.  "I knew our teacher was
lying to us," was all he said.

"Why, how?" asked his father.

"Why, she told us this morning that rabbits were the greatest
multipliers in the world."



At the Department Store

A man with a low voice had just completed his purchases in the
department store, says the "Brooklyn Eagle."

"What is the name?" asked the clerk.

"Jepson," replied the man.

"Chipson?"

"No, Jepson."

"Oh, yes, Jefferson."

"No, Jepson; J-e-p-s-o-n."

"Jepson?"

"That's it.  You have it.  Sixteen eighty-two----"

"Your first name; initial, please."

"Oh, K."

"O.K. Jepson."

"Excuse me, it isn't O. K.  You did not understand me.  I said 'Oh'."

"O. Jepson."

"No; rub out the O. and let the K. stand."

The clerk iooked annoyed.  "Will you please give me your initials
again?"

"I said K."

"I beg your pardon, you said O. K.  Perhaps you had better write it
yourself."

"I said 'Oh'----"

"Just now you said K."

"Allow me to finish what I started.  I said 'Oh,' because I did not
understand what you were asking me.  I did not mean that it was my
initial.  My name is Kirby Jepson."

"Oh!"

"No, not O., but K.  Give me the pencil, and I'll write it down for
you myself.  There, I guess it's O. K. now."



_The Worst Death There Is_ BY BILL NYE

It is now the proper time for the cross-eyed woman to fool with the
garden hose.  I have faced death in almost every form, and I do not
know what fear is, but when a woman with one eye gazing into the
zodiac and the other peering into the middle of next week, and wearing
one of those floppy sunbonnets, picks up the nozzle of the garden hose
and turns on the full force of the institution, I fly wildly to the
Mountains of Hepsidam.

Water won't hurt any one, of course, if care is used not to forget and
drink any of it, but it is this horrible suspense and uncertainty
about facing the nozzle of a garden hose in the hands of a cross-eyed
woman that unnerves and paralyzes me.

Instantaneous death is nothing to me.  I am as cool and collected
where leaden rain and iron hail are thickest as I would be in my own
office writing the obituary of the man who steals my jokes.  But I
hate to be drowned slowly in my good clothes and on dry land, and have
my dying gaze rest on a woman whose ravishing beauty would drive a
narrow-gauge mule into convulsions and make him hate himself t'death.



_A Long-Lived Family_

A "dime museum" manager, having heard of a man 123 years of age,
journeyed to his home to try and secure him for exhibition purposes.

"Well, my friend," said the museum manager, "the proofs of your age
seem to be all right.  Now, how would you like to come to my place,
just do nothing but sit on a platform and let people look at you, and
I will pay you $100 a week ?"

"I'd like it all right," answered the aged man.  "But I couldn't go,
of course, unless I had my father's consent."

"Your father!" gasped the manager.  "Do you mean to say your father is
alive?"

"Yes, indeed," replied the man.

"Well, where is your father?  Home here?" asked the manager.

"Oh, yes," was the answer.  "He's upstairs, putting grandfather to
bed!"



_Silenced the Ringleader_

The head teacher in a Sunday-school was much worried by the noise of
the pupils in the next room, At last, unable to bear it any longer, he
mounted a chair and looked over the partition.  Seeing a boy a little
taller than the others talking a great deal, he leaned over, hoisted
him over the partition, and banged him into a chair in his room,
saying:

"Now be quiet."

A quarter of an hour later a smaller head appeared around the door and
a meek little voice said:

"Please, sir, you've got our teacher."



_Got Out of That, All Right_

"My dear," said a wife to her husband, "do you realize that you have
forgotten that this is my birthday ?"

"Yes, dearie, I did forget it," replied the husband.  "Isn't it
natural that I should?  There isn't really anything about you to
remind me that you are a day older than you were a year ago."



_He Simply Looked That Way_

The man in the smoker was boasting of his unerring ability to tell
from a man's looks exactly what city he came from.  "You, for
example," he said to the man next to him, "you are from New Orleans?"
He was right.

"You, my friend," turning to the man on the other side of him, "I
should say you are from Chicago?"  Again he was right.

The other two men got interested.

"And you are from Boston?" he asked the third man.

"That's right, too," said the New Englander.

"And you from Philadelphia, I should say?" to the last man.

"No, sir," answered the man with considerable warmth; "I've been sick
for three months: that's what makes me look that way!"



_What She Would Like_

A little girl stood in a city meat-market waiting for some one to
attend to her wants.  Finally the proprietor was at liberty,
approached her and said benignantly, "Is there anything you would
like, little girl?"

"Oh, yes, sir, please: I want a diamond ring, and a seal-skin sacque,
a real foreign nobleman, and a pug dog, and a box at the opera, and,
oh, ever so many other things; but all Ma wants is ten cents' worth of
bologna."



_The Highest Price in the Store_

A rich American woman visited a Japanese art shop in Paris.  It
happened to be a dull, dark afternoon.  She looked at the bronzes,
jewels, drawings and other things, and finally, pointing toward a
dusky corner, she said to the polite young salesman: "How much is that
Japanese idol over there worth?"

The salesman bowed, and answered: "About five hundred thousand francs,
madam.  It is the proprietor."



_From Different Points_

"Father, you were born in California, you say?"

"Yes, my son."

"And mother was born in New York ?"

"Yes."

"And I was born in Indiana?"

"Yes, my boy."

"Well, father, don't it beat the Dutch how we all got together!"



_So Son: So Father_?

A small boy who had been very naughty was first reprimanded, then told
that he must take a whipping.  He flew upstairs and hid in the far
corner under a bed.  Just then the father came home.  The mother told
him what had occurred.  He went upstairs and proceeded to crawl under
the bed toward the youngster, who whispered excitedly, "Hello, Pop, is
she after you, too?"



_How Could He_?

"Papa" was becoming impatient at the lateness of the hour when he
remarked: "I can't see why that young fellow who is calling on Minnie
hasn't sense enough to go home.  It's near midnight."

"The dear little brother" of the family just then came in, heard his
father's remark, and ventured some light:

"He can't go, father.  Sister's sitting on him."



_Couldn't Leave Town_

A lawyer had a horse that always balked when he attempted to cross a
certain bridge leading out of the village.  No amount of whipping or
urging would induce him to cross it, so he advertised him for sale:
"To be sold for no other reason than that the owner would like to
leave town."



_He Knew His Father_

"Suppose," said a father to his little boy, "you have half an apple
and I give you another half.  How much have you?"

"A whole apple," said the boy.

"Well," continued the father, "suppose you had a half dollar and I
gave you another half dollar.  What would you have then?"

"A fit," promptly answered the boy.



_A Valuable Office Boy_

The employer was bending over a table, looking at the directory.  The
new office boy slipped up quietly and poked a note into his hand.  The
surprised employer opened it, and read:

"Honored Sir--Yer pants is ripped."



_She Had a Question to Ask_

A certain prominent dry-goods merchant is also a Sunday-school
superintendent.  Not long since he devoted the last few moments of the
weekly session to an impressive elucidation of the parable of the
Prodigal Son, and afterward asked with due solemnity if any one of the
"little gleaners" present desired to ask a question.  Sissy Jones's
hand shot up.

"Very well," he said, designating her with a benevolent finger and a
bland smile, "what is it you would like to know, Cecilia?"

"Please, what's the price of them little pink parasols in your
show-window?"



_The Only Time When He Does_

A "Subscriber" once wrote to an editor and asked: "Please tell me,
does a man in running around a tree go before or behind himself?"

The editor answered:

"That depends.  If he is trying to catch himself, necessarily he
follows himself, and consequently goes behind.  If, on the contrary,
he is running away from himself, the deduction leads to the very
obvious conclusion that he precedes himself, and consequently goes
before.  If he succeeds in catching up with himself, and passes
himself, at the moment of passing he neither precedes nor follows
himself, but both he and himself are running even.  This is the only
case where he does not go before or behind himself."



_In the Absence of a Tip_

"Excuse me, madam, would you mind walking the other way and not
passing the horse?" said an English cabman with exaggerated politeness
to the fat lady who had just paid a minimum fare, with no fee.

"Why?" she inquired.

"Because if 'e sees wot 'e's been carrying for a shilling 'e'll 'ave a
fit," was the freezing answer.



_Her Father Didn't Like It_

A young man told his girl the other night that if she didn't marry him
he'd get a rope and hang himself right in front of her house.  "Oh,
please, don't do it, dear," she said; "you know father doesn't want
you hanging around here."



_He Didn't Mind His Going Once_

An elderly gentleman, a stranger in New York and not sure of his way,
stopped a young man on Fifth Avenue and said:

"Young man, I would like very much to go to Central Park."

The young man became thoughtful for a moment, and then, looking the
old gentleman in the face, said:

"Well, I don't mind your going just this once, but don't ever, ever
ask me to go there again."



_Never Again_

It was a pitiful mistake, an error sad and grim.  I waited for the
railway train; the light was low and dim.  It came at last, and from a
car there stepped a dainty dame, and, looking up and down the place,
she straight unto me came.  "Oh, Jack!" she cried, "oh, dear old
Jack!" and kissed me as she spake; then looked again, and, frightened,
cried, "Oh, what a bad mistake!"  I said, "Forgive me, maiden fair,
for I am not your Jack; and as regards the kiss you gave, I'll
straightway give it back."  And since that night I've often stood upon
that platform dim, but only once in a man's whole life do such things
come to him.



_A Kiss in the Rain_ by SAMUEL MINTURN PECK

  One stormy morn I chanced to meet
    A lassie in the town;
  Her locks were like the ripened wheat,
    Her laughing eyes were brown.
  I watched her as she tripped along
    Till madness filled my brain,
  And then--and then--I know 'twas wrong--
   I kissed her in the rain.

  With raindrops shining on her cheek
    Like dewdrops on a rose,
  The little lassie strove to speak,
    My boldness to oppose;
  She strove in vain, and quivering,
    Her fingers stole in mine;
  And then the birds began to sing,
    The sun began to shine.

  Oh, let the clouds grow dark above,
    My heart is light below;
  'Tis always summer when we love,
    However winds may blow;
  And I'm as proud as any prince,
    All honors I disdain:
  'She says I am her _rain beau_ since
    I kissed her in the rain.



_What He Had Re(a)d_

An Irishman, says "The Rochester Times," recently went before Judge
Stephens to be naturalized.

"Have you read the Declaration of Independence?" the Court asked.

"I hov not," said Pat.

"Have you read the Constitution of the United States?"

"I hov not, yer Honor."

The Judge looked sternly at the applicant, and asked:

"Well, what have you read?"

Patrick hesitated but the fraction of a second before replying:

"I hov red hairs on me neck, yer Honor."



_Apostle and Epistle_

A man riding through the mountains of Tennessee stopped one evening to
water his horse before a little cabin, outside of which sat an old
colored woman watching the antics of a couple of piccaninnies playing
near by.

"Good-evening, Aunty," he called.  "Cute pair of boys you've got.
Your children?"

"Laws-a-massy!  Mah chillun!  'Deed, dem's mah daughteh's chilluns.
Come hyah, you boys."

As the boys obeyed the summons the man inquired their names.

"Clah to goodness, sah, dem chilluns is right smaht named!" said the
old woman.  "Ye see, mah daughteh done got 'ligion long ago, an' named
dese hyah boys right out de Bible, sah.  Dis hyah one's named Apostle
Paul, an' de uddah's called Epistle Peter."



_More than Enough_

An eight-year-old boy went to a church picnic, and, being a favorite
with the ladies, had been liberally supplied with good things to eat.
Later in the day one of the ladies noticed the boy sitting near a
stream with a woebegone expression on his face and his hands clasped
over his stomach.

"Why, what's the matter, Willie?" she kindly asked.  "Haven't you had
enough to eat?"

"Oh, yes'm," said the boy.  "I've had enough.  I feel as though I
don't want all I've got."



_His Only Request_

A pretty young girl was walking through a Richmond hospital with
delicacies for the sick and wounded.  She overheard a suffering young
Confederate officer say, "Oh, my Lord!"

Wishing to rebuke him slightly she came to his bedside and said:

"I think that I heard you call upon the name of the Lord.  I am one of
His daughters.  Is there anything that I can do for you?"

He looked upon the lovely face.

"Yes," he said, "please ask Him to make me His son-in-law."



A Good Majority

A well-known English surgeon was imparting some clinical instructions
to half a dozen students, according to "The Medical Age."  Pausing at
the bedside of a doubtful case he said: "Now, gentlemen, do you think
this is or is not a case for operation?"

One by one each student made his diagnosis, and all of them answered
in the negative.

"Well, gentlemen, you are all wrong," said the wielder of the scalpel,
"and I shall operate to-morrow."

"No, you won't," said the patient, as he rose in his bed; "six to one
is a good majority; gimme my clothes."



_Ready to Accommodate Her_

Attorney-General Moody was once riding on the platform of a Boston
street car, standing next to the gate that protected passengers from
cars coming on the other track.  A Boston lady came to the door of the
car, and, as it stopped, started toward the gate, which was hidden
from her by the men standing before it.

"Other side, please, lady," said the conductor.

He was ignored as only a born-and-bred Bostonian can ignore a man.
The lady took another step toward the gate.

"You must get off the other side," said the conductor.

"I wish to get off on this side," came the answer in tones that
congealed that official into momentary silence.  Before he could
explain or expostulate Mr. Moody came to his assistance.

"Stand to one side, gentlemen," he remarked quietly.  "The lady wishes
to climb over the gate."



_A New Name for Them_

One rainy afternoon Aunt Sue was explaining the meaning of various
words to her young nephew.  "Now, an heirloom, my dear, means
something that has been handed down from father to son," she said.

"Well," replied the boy thoughtfully, "that's a queer name for my
pants."



_He Wanted to Know_

A bishop in full robes of office, with his gown reaching to his feet,
was teaching a Sunday-school class.  At the close he said he would be
glad to answer any questions.

A little hand went up, and he asked: "Well, my boy?"

"Can I ask?" said the boy.

"Certainly," said the Bishop; "what is it ?"

"Well," asked the boy, "is dem all you've got on, or do you wear pants
under dem?"



_Woman's Love and Man's Love_

"There's just two things that break up most happy homes," observed a
philosopher.

"What's them?" inquired a listener.

"Woman's love for dry goods an' man's love for wet goods, b'gosh!"



_Much Simpler_

At a country fair out in Kansas a man went up to a tent where some elk
were on exhibition, and stared wistfully up at the sign.

"I'd like to go in there," he said to the keeper, "but it would be
mean to go in without my family, and I cannot afford to pay for my
wife and seventeen children."

The keeper stared at him in astonishment.  "Are all those your
children?" he gasped.

"Every one," said the man.

"You wait a minute," said the keeper.  "I'm going to bring the elk out
and let them see you all."



_One Button was in Use_

A school principal was trying to make clear to his class the
fundamental doctrines of the Declaration of Independence.

"Now, boys," he said, "I will give you each three ordinary buttons.
Here they are.  You must think of the first one as representing Life,
of the second one as representing Liberty, and the third one as
representing the Pursuit of Happiness.  Next Sunday I will ask you
each to produce the three buttons and tell me what they represent."

The following Sunday the teacher said to the youngest member:

"Now, Johnnie, produce your three buttons and tell me what they stand
for."

"I ain't got 'em all," he sobbed, holding out two of the buttons.
"Here's Life an' here's Liberty, but mommer sewed the Pursuit of
Happiness on my pants."



_He Remembered_

A restaurant-keeper hung out this sign:

     "Coffee:
   Such as Mother Used to Make."

A customer asked, pointing to the sign:

"Is your coffee really such as mother used to make?"

"It is," replied the proprietor.

"Then," said the man with a reminiscent look, "give me a cup of tea."



_Wasn't Delicate at All_

A young man, not regarded as a very desirable suitor, had called upon
a young lady a number of times, each time to be told by the maid that
"Miss Florence was not well today."

One day, in response to his card, the young lady's mother, who was a
recent accession to the newly-rich ranks, and whose education was not
as sure as it might be, appeared and explained once more to the young
man that the daughter was not well.

"I am very sorry, indeed," said the young man as he rose to go, "that
your daughter is so delicate."

"Delicate?" sniffed the mother; "Florence dell'cate?  Not at all.
Why, she is the most indelicate girl you ever met."



_A Live Topic_

A member of the faculty of the University of Chicago, according to
"Harper's Weekly," tells of the sad case of a young woman from Indiana
who was desirous of attaining social prominence in Chicago.

Soon after her arrival there she made the acquaintance of a student at
the university to whom she took a great fancy.

Evidently it was at this time she realized for the first time that her
early education had been neglected, for she said to a friend:

"I suppose that, as he is a college man, I'll have to be awful careful
what I say.  Whatever will I talk about to him?"

The friend suggested history as a safe topic.  To her friend's
astonishment she took the advice seriously, and shortly commenced in
earnest to "bone up" in English history.

When the young man called, the girl listened for some time with
ill-concealed impatience to his talk of football, outdoor meets,
dances, etc., but finally she decided to take the matter in her own
hands.  She had not done all that reading for nothing; so, a pause in
the conversation affording the desired opportunity, she suddenly
exclaimed, with considerable vivacity:

"Wasn't it awful about Mary, Queen of Scots?"

"Why, what's the matter?" stammered the student, confused.

"My gracious!" almost yelled the girl from Indiana, "didn't you know?
Why, the poor thing had her head cut off!"



_The After-College Girl's Complaint_

A lady was calling on some friends one summer afternoon.  The talk
buzzed along briskly, fans waved and the daughter of the house kept
twitching uncomfortably, frowning and making little smothered
exclamations of annoyance.  Finally, with a sigh, she rose and left
the room.

"Your daughter," said the visitor, "seems to be suffering from the
heat."

"No," said the hostess.  "She is just back home from college and she
is suffering from the family grammar."



_It All Seemed So Unnecessary_

A city man once had occasion, says "Lippincott's Magazine," to stop at
a country home where a tin basin and a roller-towel on the back porch
sufficed for the family's ablutions.  For two mornings the "hired man"
of the household watched in silence the visitor's efforts at making a
toilette under the unfavorable auspices, but when on the third day the
tooth-brush, nail-file, whisk-broom, etc., had been duly used and
returned to their places in the traveler's grip, he could suppress his
curiosity no longer, so boldly put the question: "Say, Mister, air you
always that much trouble to yo'se'f?"



_Overdid it a Bit_

A famous statesman prided himself on his success in campaigning, when
called upon to reach a man's vote through his family pride.

On one of his tours he passed through a country town when he came
suddenly upon a charming group--a comely woman with a bevy of little
ones about her--in a garden.  He stopped short, then advanced and
leaned over the front gate.

"Madam," he said In his most ingratiating way, "may I kiss these
beautiful children?"

"Certainly, sir," the lady answered demurely.

"They are lovely darlings," said the campaigner after he had finished
the eleventh.  "I have seldom seen more beautiful babies.  Are they
all yours, marm?"

The lady blushed deeply.

"Of course they are--the sweet little treasures," he went on.  "From
whom else, marm, could they have inherited these limpid eyes, these
rosy cheeks, these profuse curls, these comely figures and these
musical voices?"

The lady continued blushing.

"By-the-way, marm," said the statesman, "may I bother you to tell your
estimable husband that ------, the Republican candidate for Governor,
called upon him this evening?"

"I beg your pardon," said the lady, "I have no husband."

"But these children, madam--you surely are not a widow ?"

"I fear you were mistaken, sir, when you first came up.  These are not
my children.  This is an orphan asylum!"



_One on the Doctor That Time_

A prominent physician, whose specialty was physical diagnosis,
required his patients, before entering his private consultation-room,
to divest themselves of all superfluous clothing in order to save
time.  One day a man presented himself without having complied with
this requirement.

"Why do you come in here without complying with my rules?" demanded
the doctor.  "Just step into that side room and remove your clothing
and then I'll see you.  Next patient, please!"

The man did as requested, and after a time presented himself in
regular order duly divested of his clothing.

"Now," said the doctor, "what can I do for you ?"

"I just called," replied the man, "to collect that tailoring bill
which you owe us."



_Anxious About Him_

One winter's day a very bowlegged tramp called at a home in Ontario
and stood to warm himself by the kitchen stove.  A little boy in the
home surveyed him carefully for some minutes, then finally approaching
him, he said: "Say, mister, you better stand back; you're warping!"



_The Only Way He Could Help_

Chief Justice Matthews, while presiding over the Supreme Court at
Washington, took the several Justices of the Court for a run down
Chesapeake Bay.  A stiff wind sprang up, and Justice Gray was getting
decidedly the worst of it. As he leaned over the rail in great
distress, Chief Justice Matthews touched him on the shoulder and said
in a tone of deepest sympathy: "Is there anything I can do for you,
Gray?"

"No, thank you," returned the sick Justice, "unless your Honor can
overrule this motion."



_He Was Willing to Oblige_

A young North Carolina girl is charming, but, like a great many other
charming people, she is poor.  She never has more than two evening
gowns in a season, and the ruin of one of them is always a very
serious matter to her.  She went to a little dancing-party last week
and she wore a brand-new white frock.  During the evening a great big,
red-faced, perspiring man came up and asked her to dance.  He wore no
gloves.  She looked at his well-meaning but moist hands despairingly,
and thought of the immaculate back of her waist.  She hesitated a bit,
and then she said, with a winning smile;

"Of course I'll dance with you, but, if you don't mind, won't you
please use your handkerchief?"

The man looked at her blankly a moment or two.  Then a light broke
over his face.

"Why, certainly," he said.

And he pulled out his handkerchief and blew his nose.



_Not All the Time, But_----

A man saw a waiter in a restaurant spill a tureen of tomato soup over
a young lady's white gown.

The young lady, instead of flying into a passion, smiled.  She said it
didn't matter.  She continued to eat and to talk as though nothing had
happened.

This so impressed the man that he got an introduction to the young
lady, proposed to her at the end of a month or so, and was accepted.

Some time after the marriage he spoke of the tomato-soup accident.

"I shall never forget it," said the bride.

"Your conduct," said the man, "was admirable."

"I remember," she said, "that I did behave very well at the time; but
I wish you could have seen the marks of my teeth on the bedpost that
night."



_Necessity and Invention_

A mother with her seven children started away on a journey.  After
entering the car the largest child was laid out flat on the seat, and
the remaining six then sat upon him in a row.

When the conductor came around to collect the fares the mother counted
her money, handed it over, smiled, and suavely said: "Sir, the oldest
is under six."



_Taking No Chances_

An epileptic dropped in a fit on the streets of Boston not long ago,
and was taken to a hospital.  Upon removing his coat there was found
pinned to his waistcoat a slip of paper on which was written:

"This is to inform the house-surgeon that this is just a case of plain
fit: not appendicitis.  My appendix has already been removed twice."



_Too Much Curiosity_

A dangerous operation was being performed upon a woman.  Old Doctor
A------, a quaint German, full of kindly wit and professional
enthusiasm, had several younger doctors with him.  One of them was
administering the ether.  He became so interested in the old doctor's
work that he withdrew the cone from the patient's nostrils and she
half-roused and rose to a sitting posture, looking with wild-eyed
amazement over the surroundings.  It was a critical period, and Doctor
A------ did not want to be interrupted.  "Lay down, dere, voman," he
commanded gruffly.  "You haf more curiosity as a medical student."



_They Were Both Charged_

A little girl, brushing her hair, found that it "crackled," and asked
her mother why it did.

"Why, dear, you have electricity in your hair," explained the mother.

"Isn't that funny?" commented the little one.  "I have electricity in
my hair, and Grandmother has gas in her stomach."



_Could Use the Other Kind, Too_

"Here," said the salesman, "is something we call the 'lovers' clock.'
You can set it so it will take it two hours to run one hour."

"I'll take that," said Miss Jarmer with a bright blush.  "And now, if
you have one that can be set so as to run two hours in one hour's time
or less, I think I'd like one of that kind, too."



_A Regard for Appearance_

A milliner endeavored to sell to a colored woman one of the last
season's hats at a very moderate price.  It was a big white
picture-hat.

"Law, no, honey!" exclaimed the woman.  "I could nevah wear that.  I'd
look jes' like a blueberry in a pan of milk."



_Rapid-Fire_

A frivolous young English girl, with no love for the Stars and
Stripes, once exclaimed at a celebration where the American flag was
very much in evidence:

"Oh, what a silly-looking thing the American flag is!  It suggests
nothing but checker-berry candy."

"Yes," replied a bystander, "the kind of candy that has made everybody
sick who ever tried to lick it."



_Kipling at a Luncheon_

At a tea the other day, says "The New York Sun," a woman heard the
following remarks made about her favorite author.  She turned to
listen, amazed by the eccentricities of conduct narrated.

"Yes, you know," the hostess was saying, "Kipling came in and behaved
so strangely!  At luncheon he suddenly sprang up and wouldn't let the
waitress come near the table.  Every time that she tried to come near
he would jump at her.

"He made a dive for the cake, which was on the lower shelf of the
sideboard, and took it into the parlor to eat it.  He got the crumbs
all over the sofa and the beautiful rug.

"When he had finished his cake he simply sat and glared at us."

The visitor finally could not control herself, and asked:

"Excuse me, but are you speaking of Mr. Rudyard Kipling?"

"Mr. Rudyard Kipling?" echoed the hostess.  "Oh, no; Kipling is our
dog!"



_Getting His Trousseau Ready_

The kindly 'Squire of the neighborhood was just leaving from a
friendly social visit to Mrs. Maguire.

"And your son, Mrs. Maguire?" said the 'Squire as he reached for his
hat.  "I hope he is well.  Busy, I suppose, getting ready for his
wedding tonight ?"

"Well, not very busy this minit, 'Squire," answered the beaming
mother.  "He's upstairs in bed while I'm washing out his trousseau."



_There Was a Chance_

"Going to send your boy on an ocean trip, are you?" said a friend to
a father.

"Yes," replied the father.  "You see, if there is anything in him I
think a long sea voyage will bring it out."



_Deserved to be Tried_

The Judge was at dinner in the new household when the young wife
asked: "Did you ever try any of my biscuits, Judge?"

"No," said the Judge, "I never did, but I dare say they deserve it."



_End of the Honeymoon_

An old married man happened to meet a beaming bridegroom on the
latter'S first day at business after the wedding trip.

"Hello!" said he; "finished your honeymoon yet?"

"I don't know," replied the happy husband, smiling.  "I have never
been able to determine the exact meaning of the word honeymoon."

"Well, then, has your wife commenced to do the cooking yet?"



_If You Have a Mole_

No one is said to be without a mole or two, and these are some of the
prognostications that mole-wearers may draw from their brown
ornaments;

A mole on the right side of a man's forehead denotes wonderful luck;
on the right side of a woman's forehead, gifts from the dead.

On the left side of a man's forehead a mole denotes a long term in
prison, on the left side of a woman's forehead, two husbands and a
life of exile.

A man with a mole in the middle of his forehead has a cruel mind; a
woman with such a mole is foolish and envious.

A mole on the neck in man or woman promises a long and happy life,
wealth and fame.

A man with a mole on the left side of the upper lip rarely marries,
and such a mole in the case of a woman denotes suffering.

On the right side of the upper-lip a mole promises great good fortune
to both sexes.



_Her Own Eyes Good Enough for Him_

A little Scotch boy's grandmother was packing his luncheon for him to
take to school one morning.  Suddenly looking up in the old lady's
face, he said:

"Grandmother, does yer specs magnify?"

"A little, my child," she answered.

"Aweel, then," said the boy, "I wad juist like it if ye wad tak' them
aff when ye're packin' my loonch."



_How Did He Know_?

After dinner, when the ladies had gone upstairs, the men, over their
coffee and cigars, talked, as men will, of love.

All of a sudden the host cried in a loud voice:

"I will tell you, gentlemen, this is the truth: I have kissed the
dainty Japanese girl.  I have kissed the South Sea Island maiden.  I
have kissed the slim Indian beauty.  And the girls of England, of
Germany, even of America, I have kissed, but it is most true that to
kiss my wife is best of all."

Then a young man cried across the table:

"By Heaven, sir, you are right there!"



_So Mother--So Son_

Vincent was altogether too garrulous in school to please his
teachers.  Such punishments as the institution allowed to be meted
out were tried without any apparent effect upon the boy until at last
the head Master decided to mention the lad's fault upon his monthly
report.

So the next report to his father had these words: "Vincent talks a
great deal."

Back came the report by mail duly signed, but with this written in
red ink under the comment: "You ought to hear his mother."



_An Endless Wash_

In one of the lesser Indian hill wars an English detachment took an
Afghan prisoner.  The Afghan was very dirty.  Accordingly two
privates were deputed to strip and wash him.

The privates dragged the man to a stream of running water, undressed
him, plunged him in, and set upon him lustily with stiff brushes and
large cakes of white soap.

After a long time one of the privates came back to make a report.  He
saluted his officer and said disconsolately:

"It's no use, sir.  It's no use."

"No use?" said the officer.  "What do you mean?  Haven't you washed
that Afghan yet?"

"It's no use, sir," the private repeated.  "We've washed him for two
hours, but it's no use."

"How do you mean it's no use ?" said the officer angrily.

"Why, sir," said the private, "after rubbin' him and scrubbin' him
till our arms ached I'll be hanged if we didn't come to another suit
of clothes."



_Once Dead Always Dead_

The hero of the play, after putting up a stiff fight with the
villain, had died to slow music, says a storyteller in "The Chicago
Tribune."

The audience insisted on his coming before the curtain.

He refused to appear.

But the audience still insisted.

Then the manager, a gentleman with a strong accent, came to the front.

"Ladies an' gintlemen," he said, "the carpse thanks ye kindly, but he
says he's dead, an' he's goin' to stay dead."



_Had to Get it Done Somehow_

A little boy bustled into a grocery one day with a memorandum in his
hand.

"Hello, Mr. Smith," he said.  "I want thirteen pounds of coffee at 32
cents."

"Very good," said the grocer, and he noted down the sale, and put his
clerk to packing the coffee.  "Anything else, Charlie?"

"Yes.  Twenty-seven pounds of sugar at 9 cents."

"The loaf, eh?  And what else?"

"Seven and a half pounds of bacon at 20 cents."

"That will be a good brand.  Go on."

"Five pounds of tea at 90 cents; eleven and a half quarts of molasses
at 8 cents a pint; two eight-pound hams at 21 1/4 cents, and five
dozen jars of pickled walnuts at 24 cents a jar."

The grocer made out the bill,

"It's a big order," he said.  "Did your mother tell you to pay for
it?"

"My mother," said the boy, as he pocketed the neat and accurate bill,
"has nothing to do with this business.  It is my arithmetic lesson
and I had to get it done somehow."



_A Personal Demonstration_

Chatting in leisurely fashion with Prince Bismarck in Berlin Lord
Russell asked the Chancellor how he managed to rid himself of
importunate visitors whom he could not refuse to see, but who stuck
like burrs when once admitted.

"Oh," replied Bismarck, "I have my easy escape.  My wife knows people
of this class very well, and when she is sure there is a bore here
and sees them staying too long she manages to call me away on some
plausible pretext."

Scarcely had he finished speaking when the Princess Bismarck appeared
at the door.  "My dear," she said to her husband, "you must come at
once and take your medicine; you should have taken it an hour ago."



_Not for Him_

A quiet and retiring citizen occupied a seat near the door of a
crowded car when a masterful stout woman entered.

Having no newspaper behind which to hide he was fixed and subjugated
by her glittering eye.  He rose and offered his place to her.
Seating herself--without thanking him--she exclaimed in tones that
reached to the farthest end of the car:

"What do you want to stand up there for?  Come here and sit on my
lap."

"Madam," gasped the man, as his face became scarlet.  "I beg your
pardon, I--I----"

"What do you mean?" shrieked the woman.  "You know very well I was
speaking to my niece there behind you."



_Such a Pleasant Room_

"It ain't ev'rybody I'd put to sleep in this room," said old Mrs.
Jinks to the fastidious and extremely nervous young minister who was
spending a night at her house.

"This here room is full of sacred associations to me," she went on,
as she bustled around opening shutters and arranging the curtains.
"My first husband died in that bed with his head on these very
pillers, and poor Mr. Jinks died settin' right in that corner.
Sometimes when I come into the room in the dark I think I see him
settin' there still.

"My own father died layin' right on that lounge under the winder.
Poor Pa!  He was a Speeritualist, and he allus said he'd appear in
this room after he died, and sometimes I'm foolish enough to look for
him.  If you should see anything of him tonight you'd better not tell
me; for it'd be a sign to me that there was something in
Speeritualism, and I'd hate to think that.

"My son by my first man fell dead of heart-disease right where you
stand.  He was a doctor, and there's two whole skeletons in that
closet that belonged to him, and half a dozen skulls in that lower
drawer.

"There, I guess things'll do now----

"Well, good-night, and pleasant dreams."



_Giving a Woman Her Rights_

The car was full and the night was wet.  The bell rang, the car
stopped, and a lady entered.  As she looked tired a nice old
gentleman in the corner rose and inquired in a kind voice, "Would you
like to sit down, ma'am?  Excuse me, though," he added; "I think you
are Mrs. Sprouter, the advocate of woman's rights."

"I am, sir," replied the lady calmly.

"You think that women should be equal to men?" further queried the
old gentleman.

"Certainly," was the firm reply.

"You think that they should have the same rights and privileges?" was
the next question.

"Most emphatically," came from the supporter of woman's rights.

"Very well," said the kind old gentleman, sitting down again, "just
stand up and enjoy them."



_A Riddle to Willie_

  I asked my Pa a simple thing;
    "Where holes in doughnuts go?"
  Pa read his paper, then he said:
    "Oh, you're too young to know."

  I asked my Ma about the wind:
    "Why can't you see it blow?"
  Ma thought a moment, then she said:
   "Oh, you're too young to know."

  Now, why on earth do you suppose
    They went and licked me so?
  Ma asked: "Where is that jam?"  I said:
    "Oh, you're too young to know."



_Under Her Bed_

Mrs. Hicks was telling some ladies about the burglar scare in her
house the night before.

"Yes," she said, "I heard a noise and got up, and there from under
the bed I saw a man's legs sticking out."

"Mercy," exclaimed a woman--"the burglar's legs?"

"No, my dear, my husband's legs.  He had heard the noise, too."



_Didn't Think He Was Polite_

They were on their honeymoon.  He had bought a catboat and had taken
her out to show her how well he could handle a boat, putting her to
tend the sheet.  A puff of wind came, and he shouted in no uncertain
tones:

"Let go the sheet."

No response.

Then again:

"Let go that sheet, quick."

Still no movement.  A few minutes after, when both were clinging to
the bottom of the overturned boat, he said:

"Why didn't you let go that sheet when I told you to, dear?"

"I would have," said the bride, "if you had not been so rough about
it.  You ought to speak more kindly to your wife."



_He Had a Large Reach_

President Eliot, of Harvard, on a visit to the Pacific Coast, met
Professor O. B. Johnson, of the University of Washington, says "The
New York Tribune." In the course of the conversation President Eliot
asked the Westerner what chair he held.

"Well," said Professor Johnson, "I am professor of biology, but I
also give instruction in meteorology, botany, physiology, chemistry,
entomology and a few others."

"I should say that you occupied a whole settee, not a chair," replied
Harvard's chief.



_When Fighting Really Began_

An aged, gray-haired and very wrinkled old woman, arrayed in the
outlandish calico costume of the mountains, was summoned as a witness
in court to tell what she knew about a fight in her house.  She took
the witness-stand with evidences of backwardness and proverbial
Bourbon verdancy.  The Judge asked her in a kindly voice what took
place.  She insisted it did not amount to much, but the Judge by his
persistency finally got her to tell the story of the bloody fracas.

"Now, I tell ye, Jedge, it didn't amount to nuthn'.  The fust I
knowed about it was when Bill Saunder called Tom Smith a liar, en Tom
knocked him down with a stick o' wood.  One o' Bill's friends then
cut Tom with a knife, slicin' a big chunk out o' him.  Then Sam
Jones, who was a friend of Tom's, shot the other feller and two more
shot him, en three or four others got cut right smart by somebody.
That nachly caused some excitement, Jedge, en then they commenced
fightin'."



_The Wrong Kind of a Baby_

In a certain home where the stork recently visited there is a
six-year-old son of inquiring mind.  When he was first taken in to
see the new arrival he exclaimed:

"Oh, mamma, it hasn't any teeth!  And no hair!"  Then, clasping his
hands in despair, he cried: "Somebody has done us!  It's an old baby."



_A Poser for the Salesman_

"It's not so much a durable article that I require, sir," said Miss
Simpkins.  "I want something dainty, you know; something coy, and at
the same time just a wee bit saucy--that might look well for evening
wear."



_Not in the Army, After All_

A Methodist negro exhorter shouted: "Come up en jine de army ob de
Lohd."

"Ise done jined," replied one of the congregation.

"Whar'd yoh jine?" asked the exhorter.

"In de Baptis' Chu'ch."

"Why, chile," said the exhorter, "yoh ain't in the army; yoh's in de
navy."



[Transcriber's Note:  The copy of this book I was working from was
missing pages 71-74 inclusive.]



_Her Literary Loves_

A talented young professor who was dining one evening at the home of
a college president became very much interested in the very pretty
girl seated at his left.  Conversation was somewhat fitful.  Finally
he decided to guide it into literary channels, where he was more at
home, and, turning to his companion, asked;

"Are you fond of literature?"

"Passionately," she replied.  "I love books dearly."

"Then you must admire Sir Walter Scott," he exclaimed with sudden
animation.  "Is not his 'Lady of the Lake' exquisite in its flowing
grace and poetic imagery?  Is it not----"

"It is perfectly lovely," she assented, clasping her hands in
ecstasy.  "I suppose I have read it a dozen times."

"And Scott's 'Marmion/" he continued, "with its rugged simplicity and
marvelous description--one can almost smell the heather on the heath
while perusing its splendid pages."

"It is perfectly grand," she murmured.

"And Scott's 'Peveril of the Peak' and his noble 'Bride of
Lammermoor'--where in the English language will you find anything
more heroic than his grand auld Scottish characters and his graphic,
forceful pictures of feudal times and customs?  You like them, I am
sure."

"I just dote upon them," she replied.

"And Scott's Emulsion," he continued hastily, for a faint suspicion
was beginning to dawn upon him.

"I think," she interrupted rashly, "that it's the best thing he ever
wrote."



_How Grandma Viewed Them_

"I'm glad Billy had the sense to marry a settled old maid," said
Grandma Winkum at the wedding.

"Why, Grandma?" asked the son.

"Well, gals is hity-tity, and widders is kinder overrulin' and
upsettin'.  But old maids is thankful and willin' to please."



_So Easy When it is Explained_

A woman riding in a Philadelphia trolley-car said to the conductor:

"Can you tell me, please, on what trolley-cars I can use these
exchange slips?  They mix me up somewhat."

"They really shouldn't, madam," said the polite conductor.  "It is
very simple: East of the junction by a westbound car an exchange from
an eastbound car is good only if the westbound car is west of the
junction formed by said eastbound car.  South of the junction formed
by a northbound car an exchange from a southbound car is good south
of the junction if the northbound car was north of the junction at
the time of issue, but only south of the junction going south if the
southbound car was going north at the time it was south of the
junction.  That is all there is to it."



_Sixty Girls Not One Too Many_

A New York firm recently hung the following sign at the entrance of a
large building: "Wanted: Sixty girls to sew buttons on the sixth
floor."



_One on the President_

When the President alighted at Red Hill, Virginia, a few months ago,
to see his wife's new cottage, he noticed that an elderly woman was
about to board the train, and, with his usual courtesy, he rushed
forward to assist her.  That done, he grasped her hand and gyve it an
"executive shake."  This was going too far, and the woman, snatching
her hand away and eying him wrathfully, exclaimed: "Young man, I
don't know who you are, and I don't care a cent; but I must say you
are the freshest somebody I've ever seen in these parts."



_No Doubt of it_

The lesson was from the "Prodigal Son," and the Sunday-school teacher
was dwelling on the character of the elder brother.  "But amidst all
the rejoicing," he said, "there was one to whom the preparation of
the feast brought no joy, to whom the prodigal's return gave no
pleasure, but only bitterness; one who did not approve of the feast
being held, and had no wish to attend it.  Now can any of you tell
who this was?"  There was a short silence, followed by a vigorous
cracking of thumbs, and then from a dozen little mouths came the
chorus: "Please, sir, it was the fatted calf."



_The Lesson Stopped_

The teacher was taking a class in the infant Sabbath-school room and
was making her pupils finish each sentence to show that they
understood her.

"The idol had eyes," the teacher said, "but it could not----"

"See," cried the children.

"It had ears, but it could not----"

"Hear," was the answer.

"It had lips," she said, "but it could not----"

"Speak," once more replied the children.

"It had a nose, but it could not----"

"Wipe it," shouted the children; and the lesson had to stop a moment.



_The Wrong One_

A young man had been calling now and then on a young lady, when one
night, as he sat in the parlor waiting for her to come down, her
mother entered the room instead, and asked him in a very grave, stern
way what his intentions were.

He turned very red, and was about to stammer some incoherent reply,
when suddenly the young lady called down from the head of the stairs:

"Mamma, mamma, that is not the one."



_A Good Pair of Boots_

"You know," said a "smart" young man to a girl, "some one has said
that 'if you would make a lasting pair of boots take for the sole the
tongue of a woman.'"

"Yes," replied the girl, "and for the uppers you ought to take the
cheek of the man who said it."



_Not Just the Right Place_

A bashful young couple, who were evidently very much in love, entered
a crowded street car.

"Do you suppose we can squeeze in here?" he asked, looking doubtfully
at her blushing face.

"Don't you think, dear, we had better wait until we get home?" was
the low, embarrassed reply.



_What Else Could He Be_?

There is a man who is the head of a large family, nearly every member
of which is a performer on some kind of musical instrument.

A friend who was visiting the house of this man referred to the fact,
remarking that it must be a source of great pleasure to the family,
but to this observation the father made no reply.

"Really," continued the friend, "it is remarkable.  Your younger son
is a cornetist, both your daughters are pianists, your wife is a
violinist, and, I understand, the others are also musicians.  Now
what are you, the father of such a musical combination ?"

"I," replied the old man sadly--"I am a pessimist."



_He Had to Stand Up_

An American doctor built an elegant home, says the "San Francisco
Chronicle"; his bathroom was exceptionally beautiful, being of white
marble with silver hardware; a music-box was concealed in the room.
After completion of the home an Englishman came to visit the doctor.
Now the English always show great respect for their sovereign and
their country, and this one was no exception.

After showing his home to the Englishman the doctor remembered the
fondness English people have for the bath, and escorted his guest to
the bathroom, and while there turned on the music-box, wishing to
give his guest a pleasant surprise as he bathed.  Then he left his
friend in the bathroom.

About an hour later the Englishman joined his host in the
drawing-room.  The doctor immediately asked what his guest thought of
the bathroom.  The Englishman replied: "It is beautiful, beautiful."

"Well," said the doctor, "how did you like my music-box?"

Said his guest with great disgust in his tones:

"Bah!  That music-box!  The old thing played 'God Save the King,' and
I had to stand up the whole time I was trying to bathe."



_His Heartbreaking Task_

"Darling," said the bride, "I had a terrible feeling of sadness come
over me this afternoon--a sort of feeling that you were doing
something that would break my heart if I knew of it.  Think, sweet,
what were you doing, now, this afternoon at four o'clock?"

"Dearest," replied the husband tenderly and reassuringly, "at that
hour I was licking stamps and pasting them on envelopes."



_Easily Accounted For_

An Irishman, upon arriving in America, was asked his name at Ellis
Island.  He gave it.

"Speak louder," said the officer.

He repeated it.

"Louder," again said the officer; "why, man, your voice is as soft as
a woman's!"

"Well," said Pat, "that might be.  Me mother was a woman."



_The Retort Courteous_!

A merry party being gathered in a city flat made such a racket that
the occupant of a neighboring apartment sent his servant down with a
polite message asking if it would be possible for the party to make
less noise, since, as the servant announced, "Mr. Smith says that he
cannot read."

"I am very sorry for Mr. Smith," replied the host.  "Please present
my compliments to your master, say that I am sorry he cannot read,
and tell him I could when I was four years old!"



_When He Left_

A prominent man called to condole with a lady on the death of her
husband, and concluded by saying, "Did he leave you much?"

"Nearly every night," was the reply.



_A Popular Store_

The salesman in a large department store wore a troubled look.  "You
must be severely tried," said a man standing by.  "There are all
sorts and conditions of people in the world,"

"Yes, there are," said the salesman, "and they're all here, too!"



_He Couldn't Bend_

A young man engaged board and lodging in a private family who were
extremely devout.  Before each meal a long grace was said.  To their
dismay and horror the new boarder sat bolt upright while the others
at table reverently bowed their heads.  When the second day passed
and the young man evinced no disposition to unbend, the good lady of
the house could endure the situation no longer.

"Atheism?" asked she sharply.

"No, madam," humbly responded the new boarder; "boil."



_Really, All the Same_

As the railroad train was stopping an old lady, not accustomed to
traveling, hailed the passing conductor and asked:

"Conductor, what door shall I get out by?"

"Either door, ma'am," graciously answered the conductor.  "The car
stops at both ends."



_He Had a Good Excuse_

"Good-morning, Mrs. Stubbins," said the parson; "is your husband at
home?"

"'E's 'ome, sir, but 'e's abed," replied Mrs. Stubbins, who had just
finished hanging a pair of recently-patched trousers on the
clothesline.

"How is it he didn't come to church on Sunday?  You know we must have
our hearts in the right place."

"Lor', sir," retorted the faithful wife,"'is 'eart's all right.  It's
'is trouziz!"



_One of Lincoln's Little Notes_

President Lincoln once wrote to General McClellan, when the latter
was in command of the army.  General McClellan, as is well known,
conducted a waiting campaign, being so careful not to make any
mistakes that he made very little headway.  President Lincoln sent
this brief but exceedingly pertinent letter:

"_My Dear McClellan_: If you don't want to use the army I should like
to borrow it for a while."

  "Yours respectfully,
    A. LINCOLN."



_Fair Play_

A group of drummers were trading yarns on the subject of hospitality,
says "Lippincott's Magazine," when one of them took up his parable
thus:

"I was down in Louisiana last month travelin' cross country when we
kinder got lost in a lonesome sort of road just about dark, and when
we saw a light ahead I tell you it looked first rate.  We drove up to
the light, findin' 'twas a house, and when I hollered the man came
out and we asked him to take us in for the night.   He looked at us
mighty hard, then said, 'Wall, I reckon I kin stand it if you kin.'

"So we unhitched, went in, and found 'twas only a two-room shanty and
just swarmin' with children.  He had six from four to 'leven years
old, and as there didn't seem to be but one bed, me an' Stony was
wonderin' what in thunder would become of us.

"They gave us supper, and then the old woman put the two youngest
kids to bed.  They went straight to sleep.  Then she took those out,
laid them over in the corner, put the next two to bed, and so on.
After all the children were asleep on the floor the old folks went in
the other room and told us we could go to bed if we wanted to, and,
bein' powerful tired out, we did.

"Well, sir, the next morning when we woke up we was lying over in the
corner with the kids, and the old man and the old woman had the bedl"



_Cold Comfort That_

A country minister who lived quite a distance from his church was
overtaken on the way over one Sunday morning by a heavy shower.  The
rain poured in torrents, and by the time he arrived at the church he
was almost drenched.  Shaking the water from his hat and coat he
remarked:

"Really, friends, I am almost too wet to preach."

"Oh, never mind," replied one of his congregation; "you'll be dry
enough in the pulpit!"



_A "Billet-Doux"_

  She was a winsome country lass,
  So William on a brief vacation,
  The time more pleasantly to pass,
    Essayed flirtation.
  And while they strolled in twilight dim,
  As near the time for parting drew,
  Asked if she would have from him
    A "billet-doux."
  Now this simple maid of French knew naught,
  But doubting not 'twas something nice,
  Shyly she lifted her pretty head,
  Her rosy lips together drew, and coyly said,
  "Yes, Billy--do,"
  And William--did.



_When Pat Laughed Last_

A short time ago two Englishmen on a visit to Ireland hired a boat
for the purpose of having a sail.

One of the Britons, thinking he would have a good joke at Pat's
expense, asked him if he knew anything about astrology.

"Be jabers, no," said Pat.

"Then that's the best part of your life just lost," answered the
Englishman.

The second Englishman then asked Pat if he knew anything about
theology.

"Be jabers, no," answered Pat.

"Well," the second said, "I must say that's the very best part of
your life lost."

A few minutes later a sudden squall arose and the boat capsized.  Pat
began to swim.  The Britons, however, could not swim, and both called
loudly to Pat to help them.

"Do you know anything about swimology?" asked Pat.

"No," answered both Englishmen.

"Well, be jabers," replied Pat, "then both of your lives is lost!"



_Could Eat, but Couldn't See_

A farmer who went to a large city to see the sights engaged a room at
a hotel, and before retiring asked the clerk about the hours for
dining.

"We have breakfast from six to eleven, dinner from eleven to three,
and supper from three to eight," explained the clerk.

"Wa-al, say," inquired the farmer in surprise, "what time air I goin'
ter git ter see the town?"



_How She Got It_

A little girl was sent by her mother to the grocery store with a jug
for a quart of vinegar.

"But, mamma," said the little one, "I can't say that word."

"But you must try," said the mother, "for I must have vinegar and
there's no one else to send."

So the little girl went with the jug, and as she reached the counter
of the store she pulled the cork out of the jug with a pop, swung the
jug on the counter with a thud, and said to the astonished clerk:

"There!  Smell of that and give me a quart!"



_What the "Grip" Is_

Asked what made him look so ill, an Irishman replied, "Faith, I had
the grip last winter."  To draw him out the questioner asked, "What
is the grip, Patrick?"

"The grip!" he says.  "Don't you know what the grip is?  It's a
disease that makes you sick six months after you get well!"



_Wouldn't Have Been Strange_

Two women were strangers to each other at a reception.  After a few
moments' desultory talk the first said rather querulously:

"I don't know what's the matter with that tall, blond gentleman over
there.  He was so attentive a while ago, but he won't look at me now."

"Perhaps," said the other, "he saw me come in.  He's my husband."



_A Place for Jeremiah_

A certain prosy preacher recently gave an endless discourse on the
prophets.  First he dwelt at length on the minor prophets.  At last
he finished them, and the congregation gave a sigh of relief.  He
took a long breath and continued: "Now I shall proceed to the major
prophets."

After the major prophets had received more than ample attention the
congregation gave another sigh of relief.

"Now that I have finished with the minor prophets and the major
prophets, what about Jeremiah?  Where is Jeremiah's place?"

At this point a tall man arose in the back of the church.  "Jeremiah
can have my place," he said; "I'm going home."



_The One Thing He Wanted_

After waiting the usual five or ten minutes the new arrival was
served with the first dinner course of soup.  Hesitating a moment as
he glanced at his plate, the guest said to the waiter:

"I can't eat this soup."

"I'll bring you another kind, sir," said the waiter as he took it
away.

"Neither can I eat this soup!" said the guest a trifle more
emphatically, when the second plate was served.

The waiter, angrily but silently, for the third time brought a plate
of soup.

"I simply can't eat this soup!" once more said the guest, in a low,
emphatic tone.

By this time the waiter was furious and called the hotel proprietor,
while the guests at the nearby table looked over that way with
curious glances.

"Really, sir, this is unusual.  May I ask why can't you eat any of
our soups?" demanded the proprietor.

"Because I have no spoon," replied the guest quietly.



_Why He Would Like It_

The little son of the minister, at Sunday dinner, said at the family
table:

"Father, I wish I could be 'a doorkeeper in the House of the Lord,'
as you said this morning."

"Indeed," said the minister-father, with a pleased look across the
table at his wife.

"Yes," said the boy, "for then I wouldn't have to listen to the
sermon."



_Why Mr. Duffy's Nose was Red_

The late Mr. Duffy, of Keene, New Hampshire, says "The Boston
Herald," was well known for his life-long total abstinence from
intoxicants, which seemed somewhat at variance with the fact that his
nose was very red.

On one occasion, when on business in a liquor saloon in his
neighborhood, a drummer came in to sell cigars.  To gain the good
graces of the bartender he invited all in the place to drink, to
which invitation all readily responded save Mr. Duffy.

The drummer went to him, and slapping him on the shoulder, said: "I
say, old man, what are you going to have?"

"I thank you, sir-r, but I niver dhrink," was Duffy's quiet reply.

"What, you never drink?" said the drummer with a sarcastic laugh.
"Now, if you never drink, will you please tell me what makes that
nose of yours so red?"

The impertinence of the questioner at once aroused the irascibility
of the old gentleman, and he replied: "Sir-r, it is glowing with
proid because it is kept out of other people's business."



_Why He Knew_

A prominent Judge, who was an enthusiastic golfer, had occasion to
question a boy witness in a criminal suit.

"Now, my boy," said the Judge, "are you sure that you know the nature
and significance of an oath--that is, what an oath really means?"

The boy looked up at the Judge in surprise, and then answered:

"Why, of course I do, Judge.  Don't I caddy for you at the Country
Club?"



_Her Idea of Remembrance_

Two negroes were talking about a recent funeral of a member of their
race, at which funeral there had been a profusion of floral tributes.
Said the cook:

"Dat's all very well, Mandy; but when I dies I don't want no flowers
on my grave.  Jes plant a good old watermelon-vine; an' when she gits
ripe you come dar, an' don't you eat it, but jes bus' it on de grave,
an' let de good old juice dribble down thro' de ground!"



_Did He Win Her_?

Conversation lagged for a moment, according to a "Life" story, then,
as he sipped his tea, he remarked quietly, but with a meaning
emphasis, "You are to be married."

"Mercy me!  To whom?" was the startled reply.

"To me; I came today on purpose to tell you."



_The Dog wasn't Touched_

"Madam," said the conductor as he punched a ticket, "I am very sorry,
but you can't have your dog in this car.  It is against the rules."

"I shall hold him in my lap all the way," she replied, "and he will
not disturb any one."

"That makes no difference," said the conductor.  "Dogs must ride in
the baggage-car.  I'll take and fasten him for you."

"Don't you touch my dog, sir," exclaimed the young lady excitedly.
"I will trust him to no one," and with indignant tread she marched to
the baggage-car, tied her dog and said: "Remember, please, I don't
want a soul here to touch my dog or untie him: you understand?"

The baggage crew said they did.

As the train approached her station the young lady, hailing the
conductor, asked: "Is my dog all right?"

"I don't know, miss," replied the conductor.

"Don't know?" she replied.  "Why don't you know?  It's your business
to know.  You haven't touched him or untied him?"

"No; we didn't touch or untie him, and that's just it.  You tied him
to a trunk checked for two stations back.  The trunk had to be put
off, and so we threw the dog off with the trunk!"



_Not the Kind She Wanted_

"Which way, please, to the corset department?" she asked of the
floor-walker.

"Straight back, madam."

"No, not straight back," was the reply.  "I want a straight front."



_His Last Request_

JUDGE (to prisoner just condemned to death): "You have the legal
right to express a last wish, and if it is possible it will be
granted,"

PRISONER (a barber): "I should like just once more to be allowed to
shave the District Attorney."



_Why He Really Wanted to Go_

"Would you mind if I went into the smoking-car, dear?" asked the
bridegroom in a tender voice.

"What! to smoke, sweetheart?" questioned the bride.

"Oh, dear, no," replied the young husband; "I want to experience the
agony of being away from you, so that the joy of my return will be
all the more intensified."



_No End to This Game for Two_

  Said He: "It is sweeter to give than receive.
    Of a whipping this doubtless is true,
  But of kissing I cannot believe
    It holds good, till I've tried it.  Can you?"
  Said She; "I don't know; let's each give and receive,
    And so come to proof of the prop.
  Now you give, and I'll take, and we'll leave
    The one to decide who cries 'Stop!'"




_And This in Boston_!

A man who has just returned from Boston is "chortling" over a good
joke on that correct and literary city.  He says that in the
reading-room of one of the most exclusive clubs in the Hub there is a
sign that reads:

    ONLY LOW CONVERSATION PERMITTED HERE



_Man Wants but Little, etc_.

"Please, mum," said a tramp, "would you be so kind as to let me have
a needle and thread?"

"Well, y-e-s," said the housewife at the door, "I can let you have
that."

"Thankee, mum.  Now, you'd oblige me very much if you'd let me have a
bit of cloth for a patch."

"Yes, here is some."

"Thankee very much, mum.  It's a little different color from my suit,
I see.  Perhaps, mum, you could spare me some of your husband's old
clothes that this patch will match."

"Well, I declare!  You're clever, my man, and I'll give you an old
suit.  Here is one."

"Thankee greatly, mum.  I see it's a little large, mum, but if you'll
kindly furnish me with a square meal, mebby I can fill it out."



_It Certainly Tickled Them_

An amateur artist contributed a painting to the academy for the first
time.  With natural curiosity he said to the carrier, "Did you see my
picture safely delivered?"

"Indeed I did," replied the man, "and mighty pleased they seemed to
be with it--leastways, if I may jedge, sir.  They didn't say nothin',
but, Lor'! how they did laugh when they got a light on it!"



_Cured Without Medicine_

A clergyman has had in his employ for so long a time a colored man
named Julian that the latter has come to regard himself as something
of a confidential adviser to the divine.

Early one Sunday morning the pastor awoke feeling decidedly ill.
After a futile attempt at breakfast, he summoned his old and faithful
servitor, saying:

"Julian, I want you to go to my assistant, and tell him that, as I am
unwell, he will officiate for me in this morning's service."

At this Julian demurred, and, after some argument, persuaded his
master that he would feel better if he officiated as usual.  This the
latter did, and, as predicted by the servant, he did return home
feeling much better.

"Youse better, sah ?" asked the man, meeting his master at the door.

"Very much better, thank you, Julian."

The servant grinned.  "What did I tell you, sah?  I knowed you'd be
all right jest as soon as you got that sermon outer your system."



_Enthusiasm Squelched_

An enthusiastic citizen, about to visit Europe, was rejoicing over
the fact and the pleasures to come.

"How delightful it will be," he said to his wife, "to tread the
bounding billow and inhale the invigorating oxygen of the sea, the
sea, the boundless sea!  I long to see it!  To breathe in great
drafts of life-giving air.  I shall want to stand every moment on the
prow of the steamer with my mouth open----"

"You probably will, dear," interrupted his wife encouragingly.
"That's the way all the ocean travelers do."



_Definitive_

The schoolmaster was trying to explain the meaning of the word
"conceited," which had occurred in the course of the reading lesson.
"Now, boys," he said, "suppose that I was always boasting of my
learning--that I knew a good deal o' Latin, for instance, or that my
personal appearance was--that I was very good-looking, y' know--what
should you say I was?"

Straightforward Boy; "Sure, sir, I'd say you was a liar, sir!"



_Wanted to Give Her Every Chance_

The clerk was most obliging, but the young woman customer was hard to
please.  Roll after roll of blankets did he patiently take down and
show to her; nothing suited.

For some fifteen minutes this mock sale went on, then the young woman
said condescendingly, "Well, I don't intend to buy.  I was just
looking for a friend."

"Wait a moment, madam," cried the clerk.  "There is one more blanket
left on the shelf.  Maybe you will find your friend in it."



_Murder Will Out_

The newly-graduated daughter who had decided to become an artist had
returned to her Boston home.  "I am glad that your mind has taken a
turn toward art, for you know that more is expected of you now than
if you lived in Chicago," said her proud parent.

"Yes, Father," she replied dutifully, with downcast eyes.

"And I hope that you will distinguish yourself in more than one way."

"Yes, Father."

"I particularly desire that you become noted as an essayist also,"
continued the ambitious parent.

"Yes, Father," was the still modest reply.

"I have spared neither pains nor expense in your education thus far,
but notwithstanding this immense outlay of time and money, if you can
think of anything which you believe will add to your equipment for
the career which you are about to begin--if you can suggest some
other way of refining your taste, please do so.  Do you know of
anything else, my dear?"

"Yes, Father," and this time the downcast eyes were raised and looked
hopefully into his.

"Speak out; never mind the expense."

"Well, Father, I'd like to go this afternoon and see Sullivan thump
that yap from the country."



_Taking Mamma at Her Word_

MOTHER: "Ethel, you naughty child, what have you been doing to make
Charlie cry so?"

ETHEL: "I've only been sharing my cod-liver oil with him, mamma.  You
said it was so nice."



_It Was Worse Than Bigotry_

A prisoner was brought before a police magistrate.  He looked around
and discovered that his clerk was absent.  "Here, officer," he said,
"what's this man charged with?"

"Bigotry, your Honor," replied the policeman.  "He's got three wives."

The magistrate looked at the officer as though astounded at such
ignorance.  "Why, officer," he said, "that's not bigotry--that's
trigonometry."




_A Devotional Turn of Mind_

As the new minister of the village was on his way to evening service
he met a rising young man of the place whom he was anxious to have
become an active member of the church.

"Good-evening, my young friend," he said solemnly; "do you ever
attend a place of worship?"        /

"Yes, indeed, sir; regularly, every Sunday night," replied the young
fellow with a smile.  "I'm on my way to see her now."



_Poor Little Chap_!

A little boy from the slums had been taken out into the country for
the first time.  After a bit he was found sitting, all by himself, on
a high bank, and gazing wistfully out over the hills.

The woman who had made the little excursion possible quietly seated
herself at the youngster's side.  To her the child turned a radiant
face and asked:

"Say, it's dern pretty, ain't it?  Is this all in the United States?"



_The Horse Had a Habit_

At an annual series of races "for all comers," the sun was blazing
down on a field of hot, excited horses and men, all waiting for a
tall, raw-boned beast to yield to the importunities of the starter
and get into line.

The patience of the starter was nearly exhausted.  "Bring up that
horse!" he shouted.  "Bring him up!"

The rider of the refractory beast, a youthful Irishman, yelled back;
"I can't!  This here's been a cab-horse, and he won't start till he
hears the door shut, an' I ain't got no door!"



_She Won Her Uncle_

Uncle Harry was a bachelor and not fond of babies.  Even winsome
four-year-oid Helen failed to win his heart.  Every one made too much
fuss over the youngster, Uncle Harry declared.

One day Helen's mother was called downstairs and with fear and
trembling asked Uncle Harry, who was stretched out on a sofa, if he
would keep his eye on Helen.  Uncle Harry grunted "Yes," but never
stirred from his position--in truth his eyes were tight shut.

By-and-by wee Helen tiptoed over to the sofa and leaning over Uncle
Harry softly inquired:

"Feepy?"

"No," growled Uncle Harry.

"Tired?" ventured Helen.

"No," said her uncle.

"Sick?" further inquired Helen, with real sympathy in her voice.

"No," still insisted Uncle Harry.

"Dus' feel bum, hey?"

And that won the uncle!



_Still He Wondered_

One of the physicians at a popular winter health-resort was looking
over his books one day, comparing his list of patients.  "I had a
great many more patients last year than I have this," he remarked to
his wife.  "I wonder where they have all gone to?"

"Well, never mind, dear," she replied.  "You know all we can do is to
hope for the best."



_A Lesson In It_

"The trouble with you ladies of the W.C.T.U. is," said a man to a
member of that organization, "that instead of opposing the
christening of a vessel with champagne, you ought to encourage it and
draw from it a great temperance lesson."

"Why, how can we?" asked the "white ribboner."

"Well," was the reply, "after the first taste of wine the ship takes
to water and sticks to it ever after."



_It Was His Privilege_

As an express train was going through a station, says "Tit-Bits," one
of the passengers leaned too far out of the window, overbalanced and
fell out.  He fortunately landed on a sand heap, so that he did
himself no great injury, but, with torn clothes and not a few
bruises, said to a porter who was standing by:

"What shall I do?"

"You're all right, mister," said the porter.  "Your ticket allows you
to stop off."



_Still Hopeful_

"Well, Jimmy," said his employer, "I don't see how you are going to
get out to any ball-games this season; your grandmother died four
times last summer."

"Oh, yes, I can, sir," answered Jimmy.  "Grandpapa has married again,
although it was very much against the wishes of the family."



_He Thought She Ought to Know It_

"No, I haven't anything for you today.  You are the man I gave some
pie to a fortnight ago?"

"Yis, lidy, thank you; I come back because I thought p'r'aps you'd
like to know I'm able to get about again."



_A Possible Substitute_

"What have you in the shape of cucumbers this morning?" asked the
customer of the new grocery clerk.

"Nothing but bananas, ma'am," was the reply.



_One on the Preachers_

The preachers in a certain coast town noted for its Sabbath
observance were greatly incensed over the fact that printed cards
bearing the name of a well-known shipbuilding firm had been received
by prominent citizens, inviting them to attend the launching of a
vessel on the next Sunday afternoon, the reason being given that the
tide was highest on that day.

Sunday came and in every church the launching was widely advertised
and denounced, and it was not until late in the day that some one
remembered it was April the first.



_Charlie Remembered Her Well_

A young married woman of social prominence and respectability was to
unite with the church in her home town and desired the ordinance of
baptism by immersion, preferring the primitive custom of going to the
river.  Among the number that gathered to witness the baptism was a
little boy friend, Charlie, about four years old.  The proceedings
were entirely new to the child, and he looked on with strange
curiosity as the candidate was led into the water.  The spring
freshets had made the river somewhat turbulent, and it was with
difficulty that the minister maintained his footing.  During the
following week the young woman called at the home of this family, and
after the usual greetings said to the little boy as she extended her
hand: "Come here, Charlie, and see me.  You don't know who I am, do
you?" she continued.  "Yes, indeed I do," said the boy.  "You's that
woman who went in swimmin' with the minister on Sunday."



_Couldn't Follow Him_

"John," said Farmer Foddershucks to his college-bred son, who was
home on a vacation, "hev ye noticed Si Mullet's oldest gal lately?
Strikes me she's gettin' ter be a right likely critter, hey?"

"She's as beautiful as Hebe," agreed John enthusiastically.

"Aw, shucks!" grunted Farmer F.  "She's a blame sight purtier 'n he
be.  Why, he ain't no beauty.  She gits it f'm her mother's folks."




_Frivolity of Outward Show_

Dear old Aunt Jane was making a visit in the early spring at the home
of her newly-married niece, and spring clothes was the all-absorbing
topic of conversation in the family.

"I feel sure this hat's not broad enough in the brim, Aunt Jane,"
said the worldly niece, who wanted to appear just as bewitching to
her young husband as she did in her going-away costume.

"What does it matter, child!  Look at me!" replied Aunt Jane, in a
comforting tone.  "I put on anything!  Don't I look all right?"



_Just as Well_

A Scotsman went to a dentist with a toothache.  The dentist told him
he would only get relief by having it out.

"Then I must hae gas," said the Scotsman.

While the dentist was getting it ready the Scot began to count his
money.

The dentist said, somewhat testily, "You need not pay until the tooth
is out."

"I ken that," said the Scotsman, "but as ye're aboot to mak' me
unconscious I jist want to see hoo I stan'."



_The Same, Only a Little Different_

They were newly married, according to "The New York Sun," and on a
honeymoon trip.  They put up at a skyscraper hotel.  The bridegroom
felt indisposed and the bride said she would slip out and do a little
shopping.  In due time she returned and tripped blithely up to her
room, a little awed by the number of doors that looked all alike.
But she was sure of her own and tapped gently on the panel.

"I'm back, honey; let me in," she whispered.

No answer.

"Honey, honey, let me in!" she called again, rapping louder.  Still
no answer.

"Honey, honey, it's Mabel.  Let me in."

There was silence for several seconds; then a man's voice, cold and
full of dignity, came from the other side of the door:

"Madam, this is not a beehive; it's a bathroom."



_For Him to Decide_

"Well, well," said the absent-minded professor, as he stood knee-deep
in the bathtub, "what did I get in here for?"



_A Large Corporation_

An old lady, traveling for the first time in a large city, saw a
glaring sign on the front of a high building which read, "The Smith
Manufacturing Company."

As she repeated it aloud slowly she remarked to her nephew: "Lawsy
mercy!  Well, I've hearn tell of Smiths all my life, but I never knew
before where they made 'em."



_Accommodating Man_

One day, after the brakeman had been pointing out the window and
explaining the scenery, says the Denver "News," one of the passengers
whispered to the conductor: "Conductor, can you tell me how that
brakeman lost his finger?  He seems to be a very nice fellow.  It
seems a pity he should be crippled."

"That's just it, ma'am.  He is a good fellow.  He is so obliging that
he just wore his finger off pointing out the scenery along the line."



_The Early Bird_

The card "Boy Wanted" had been swinging from the window of a
publishing house only a few minutes when a red-headed little tad
climbed to the publisher's office with the sign under his arm.

"Say, mister," he demanded of the publisher, "did youse hang out this
here 'Boy Wanted' sign?"

"I did," replied the publisher sternly.  "Why did you tear it down?"

Back of his freckles the youngster was gazing in wonder at the man's
stupidity.

"Hully gee!" he blurted.  "Why, I'm the boy!"

And he was.



_No Wonder He Asked "Why?"_

Edward had just returned from foreign service, and his brow was
troubled.

"I gave you that parrot as a birthday present, did I not, Amelia?" he
asked.

"Yes; but surely, Teddy, you are not going to speak of your tokens as
if----"

"It was young and speechless at the time."

"Yes"--with increasing wonder--"and it has never been out of this
parlor."

"There are no other young ladies in this house?"

"No; there are not."

"Then why--why, when I k-kissed your photograph in yonder album,
while waiting for you, did that wretched bird imitate your voice and
say: 'Don't do that, Herbert, please don't!'"



_The Safest Place_

A city gentleman was recently invited down to the country for "a day
with the birds."  His aim was not remarkable for its accuracy, to the
great disgust of the man in attendance, whose tip was generally
regulated by the size of the bag.

"Dear me!" at last exclaimed the sportsman, "but the birds seem
exceptionally strong on the wing this year."

"Not all of 'em, sir," was the answer.  "You've shot at the same bird
about a dozen times.  'E's a-follerin' you about, sir."

"Following me about?  Nonsense!  Why should a bird do that?"

"Well, sir," came the reply.  "I dunno, I'm sure, unless 'e's 'angin'
'round you for safety."




_An Inspiring Model_

Little Johnnie, having in his possession a couple of bantam hens,
which laid very small eggs, suddenly hit on a plan.  Going the next
morning to the fowl-run, Johnnie's father was surprised to find an
ostrich egg tied to one of the beams, and above it a card, with the
words:

"Keep your eye on this and do your best."



_When the Honeymoon Began_

A minister in a Western town was called upon one afternoon to perform
the marriage ceremony between a negro couple--the negro preacher of
the town being absent from home.

After the ceremony the groom asked the price of the service.

"Oh, well," said the minister, "you can pay me whatever you think it
is worth to you."

The negro turned and silently looked his bride over from head to
foot, then, slowly rolling up the whites of his eyes, said:

"Lawd, sah, you has done ruined me for life, you has, for sure."



_And She Kept on Smoking_

"Aunt Chloe, do you think you are a Christian?" asked a preacher of
an old negro woman who was smoking a pipe.

"Yes, brudder, I 'spects I is."

"Do you believe in the Bible?"

"Yes, brudder."

"Do you know there is a passage in the Scripture that declares that
nothing unclean shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven?"

"Yes, I'se heard of it."

"Well, you smoke, and there is nothing so unclean as the breath of a
smoker.  So what do you say to that?"

"Well, when I go dere I 'spects to leave my breff behind me."



_Doubtful Assurances_

"Do you think they approved of my sermon?" asked the newly-appointed
rector, hopeful that he had made a good impression.

"Yes, I think so," replied his wife; "they were all nodding."



_A New Use for an Apple_

The tailor's sign in a little inland town was an apple, simply an
apple.  The people were amazed at it.  They came in crowds to the
tailor, asking him what on earth the meaning of the sign was.

The tailor with a complacent smile replied:

"If it hadn't been for an apple where would the clothing business be
today?"



_It Looked That Way_

"Is Mike Clancy here?" asked the visitor at the quarry, just after
the premature explosion.

"No, sor," replied Costigan; "he's gone."

"For good?"

"Well, sor, he wint in that direction."



_Music Touched His Heart_

A thief broke into a Madison Avenue mansion early the other morning
and found himself in the music-room.  Hearing footsteps approaching,
he took refuge behind a screen.

From eight to nine o'clock the eldest daughter had a singing lesson.

From nine to ten o'clock the second daughter took a piano lesson.

From ten to eleven o'clock the eldest son had a violin lesson.

From eleven to twelve o'clock the other son had a lesson on the flute.

At twelve-fifteen all the brothers and sisters assembled and studied
an ear-splitting piece for voice, piano, violin and flute.

The thief staggered out from behind the screen at twelve-forty-five,
and falling at their feet, cried:

"For Heaven's sake, have me arrested!"



Some Amusing Blunders

A divine in drawing the attention of his congregation to a special
communion service on the following Sunday informed them that "the
Lord is with us in the forenoon and the Bishop in the evening."

A Scotch minister innocently, perhaps, hit the mark by telling his
people, "Weel, friends, the kirk is urgently in need of siller, and
as we have failed to get money honestly we will have to see what a
bazar can do for us."

There is a certain amount of excuse to be made for the young curate
who, remarking that some people came to church for no better reason
than to show off their best clothes, finished up as he glanced over
his audience, "I am thankful to see, dear friends, that none of you
has come here for that reason."

A negro student when conducting the prayers at one of the great
missionary colleges, said, "Give us all pure hearts, give us all
clean hearts, give us all sweet hearts," to which the entire
congregation made response, "Amen."

The giving-out of church notices has often proved a pitfall for the
unwary.  "During Lent," said a rector lately, "several preachers will
preach on Wednesday evenings, but I need not give their names, as
they will be all found hanging up in the porch."



_They Come High--But_

A stranger in New York asked a newsboy to direct him to a certain
bank, promising him half a dollar for it.  The boy took him about
three doors away and there was the bank.  Paying the fee, the man
said, "That was half a dollar easily earned, son."

"Sure," said the boy, "but youse mustn't fergit that bank directors
is paid high in Noo Yawk."



_At Any Cost_

A darky preacher was lost in the happy selection of his text, which
he repeated in vigorous accents of pleading.

"Oh, bredern, at de las' day dere's gwine to be sheep and dere's
gwine to be goats.  Who's gwine to be de sheep, an' who's gwine to be
de goats?  Let's all try to be like de li'l white lambs, bredern.
Shall we be de goats, sisters?  Naw, we's gwine to be de sheep.
Who's gwine to be de sheep, bredern, an' who's gwine to be de goats?
Tak' care ob youh souls, sisters; tak' care ob youh souls.  Remember,
dere's gwine to be goats an' sheep.  Who's gwine to be de sheep an'
who's gwine to be de goats?"

Just then a solitary Irishman who had been sitting in the back of the
church, listening attentively, rose and said:

"Oi'll be the goat.  Go on; tell us the joke, Elder.  Oi'll be the
goat!"



_Where Was Bill_?

Bill Jones is a country storekeeper down in Louisiana, and last
spring he went to New Orleans to purchase a stock of goods.  The
goods were shipped immediately and reached home before he did.  When
the boxes of goods were delivered at his store by the drayman his
wife happened to look at the largest; she uttered a loud cry and
called for a hammer.  A neighbor, hearing the screams, rushed to her
assistance and asked what was the matter.  The wife, pale and faint,
pointed to an inscription on the box which read as follows;

"Bill inside."



_All That Glisters is Not Gold_

One day an Irishman was seated in the waiting-room of a station with
an odorous pipe in his mouth.  One of the attendants called his
attention to the sign: "No smoking."

"Well," said Pat, "I'm not a-smokin'."

"But you have a pipe in your mouth."

"Shure, an' I've shoes on me feet an' I'm not walkin'."



_Her Affectionate Brothers_

It was Commencement Day at a well-known girls' seminary, and the
father of one of the young women came to attend the graduation
exercises.  He was presented to the principal, who said, "I
congratulate you, sir, upon your extremely large and affectionate
family."

"Large and affectionate?" he stammered and looking very much
surprised.

"Yes, indeed," said the principal.  "No less than twelve of your
daughter's brothers have called frequently during the winter to take
her driving and sleighing, while your eldest son escorted her to the
theatre at least twice a week.  Unusually nice brothers they are."



_The Voice of the Lady_

"Life" recently printed this extremely clever sketch by Tom Masson:

It was a quiet Sunday rooming on a side street.  A playful breeze had
lifted off the tarpaulin that covered the newsstand, and the
magazines were enjoying a quiet hour by themselves.

"Harper's" took occasion to edge away from "McClure's."

"Your cheapness makes me dizzy," it observed, with a superior sniff.

"My cheapness is as nothing to your dullness,", exclaimed
"McClure's," with some heat.

"Nonsense!" replied "Harper's."  "Why, I once published an
interesting story."

A chorus of groans greeted this admission.

"The trouble with you fellows," observed "The Century," "is that you
do not understand the really serious side of life."

"How can we," observed "The Metropolitan," "for we have not, like
you, a humorous department?  We----"

There was a commotion.  While these observations were going on
"Munsey's" and "Everybody's" were having a dispute.

"I publish sillier stuff than you," said "Munsey's."

"I defy you to prove it," said "Everybody's."

"Let's form a ring and have them fight it out," suggested a rank
outsider--"The Clipper."

At this, however, there was a protest from one hitherto silent.  A
soft soprano voice spoke.

"Gentlemen," it said, "would you fight in the presence of ladies?"

Whereupon the rest of the magazines took off their hats, and one by
one lapsed into respectful silence, as THE LADIES' HOME JOURNAL,
arranging its skirts anew with gentle precision, passed out on its
way to church.



_Cheer Up, Everybody_

The visiting missionary at an almshouse stopped for a moment to speak
to a very old lady and inquire, after her health and welfare.  "Thank
you, sir," replied the old lady.  "Yes, indeed, I've a great deal to
be thankful for.  I've two teeth left and they're opposite each
other."



_A New Kind of Bait_

After weeks of waiting and longing for the sport, rods, reels, gaff,
creel--everything was in readiness for a week's trout-fishing.

The young wife, smiling joyously, hurried into the room, extending
toward her husband some sticky, speckled papers.

"For goodness' sake," he exclaimed, "what on earth are you doing with
those old fly-papers?"

"I saved them for you from last summer, dear," she answered.  "You
know you said you always had to buy flies when you went fishing."



_He Could Supply Specimens_

"And what did my little darling do in school today?" a mother asked
of her young son--a "second-grader."

"We had Nature study, and it was my turn to bring a specimen," said
the boy.

"That was nice.  What did you do?"

"I brought a cockroach in a bottle, and I told teacher we had lots
more, and if she wanted I would bring one every day."



_Was It His Ghost_?

A well-known publisher has the entrance to his private office guarded
by one of his editors, a small man, who, as the day wears on, sinks
down in a little heap in his high-backed chair under the weight of
the manuscripts he has to read.  The publisher was exceedingly proud
of his friendship with a prominent Congressman, who usually called
when he was in New York.

One day the huge form of the Speaker of the House of Representatives
loomed up before the little editor, with the evident intent of
bearing down upon the private office.

"Back!" shouted the little editor, waving a slender arm with much
vigor.  "Back!  Go back to the offith and thend in your card."

The Congressman paused, inclined his head to view the obstacle that
opposed his progress, and smiled.  Then he turned on his heel and did
as he was directed.

Of course the publisher bustled out personally to conduct the great
man into the private office.  When his visitor had departed the
publisher came forth in a rage.  The little editor shriveled before
him as he began:

"What do you mean by holding up one of my oldest friends in this
fashion?  Don't you know he's at perfect liberty to walk into my
office at any time without so much as knocking?"

"Yeth," admitted the little editor feebly.

"Then what do you mean by holding him up and subjecting him to such
discourtesy ?"

"I thought he wath Dr. John Hall."

"Dr. John Hall!" exclaimed the exasperated publisher "Don't you know
that Dr. John Hall is dead?"

"Yeth," returned the little editor with earnest sincerity.  "That'th
what bothered me."



_Willie's April Fool on Mamma_!

Little Willie had a very pretty governess, and on April first he
rather startled his mother by rushing in to her and saying:

"Mamma, there's a strange man upstairs who has just put his arm
around Miss Wilson's waist, and kissed her several times----"

"What?" said the mother, as she jumped up to pull the bell for the
butler.

"April fool, Mamma!" said Willie, in great glee.  "It wasn't a
strange man at all.  It was Papa!"



_Full Particulars Given_

A small boy who had recently passed his fifth birthday was riding in
a suburban car with his mother, when they were asked the customary
question, "How old is the boy?"  After being told the correct age,
which did not require a fare, the conductor passed on to the next
person.

The boy sat quite still as if pondering over some question, and then,
concluding that full information had not been given, called loudly to
the conductor, then at the other end of the car: "And mother's
thirty-one!"



_News for the Bishop_

A newly-rich woman, who was anxious to make a favorable impression in
her neighborhood, decided to show her collection of antiques to the
Bishop when he called.  The time came, and one by one she displayed
the whole collection, giving him the history of each piece.  Finally
she pointed to the most prized article in the lot.  "There," she
said, pointing impressively to an old yellow teapot.  "That teapot
was used in the Boston Tea-party."



_A Case of Mutual Application_

MR. WOOD, a man very fond of playing jokes, met his friend, Mr.
Stone, and at once inquired jocosely:

"Hello, Stone, how are Mrs. Stone and all the little pebbles?"

"Fine," said Mr. Stone, "all well, thank you," and then, with a
twinkle in his eye: "How are Mrs. Wood and all the little splinters?"



_She Didn't Sleep Well_

A woman who lives in an inland town, while going to a convention in a
distant city spent one night of the journey on board a steamboat.  It
was the first time she had ever traveled by water.  She reached her
journey's end extremely fatigued.  To a friend who remarked it she
replied:

"Yes, I'm tired to death.  I don't know as I care to travel by water
again.  I read the card in my stateroom about how to put the
life-preserver on, and I thought I understood it; but I guess I
didn't.  Somehow, I couldn't go to sleep with the thing on."



_They Planned a Little Surprise for Him_

On a west-bound train scheduled for a long trip a very large,
muscular man fell asleep and annoyed all the passengers by snoring
tremendously.  Reading, conversation or quiet rest was an
impossibility.  Finally a drummer, carrying half a lemon in his hand,
tiptoed over to a little boy who sat behind the snorer.

"Son," said the drummer impressively, "I am a doctor, and if that man
doesn't stop snoring he'll die of apoplexy.  Watch your chance, and
as soon as his mouth opens a little wider, lean over and squeeze this
lemon into it."



_He Knew Only One_

A teacher had been telling her class of boys that recently worms had
become so numerous that they destroyed the crops, and it was
necessary to import the English sparrow to exterminate them.  The
sparrows multiplied very fast and were gradually driving away our
native birds.

Johnny was apparently very inattentive, and the teacher, thinking to
catch him napping, said;

"Johnny, which is worse, to have worms or sparrows?"

Johnny hesitated a moment and then replied:

"Please, I never had the sparrows."



_He Proved It Was Logical_

A lawyer was defending a man accused of housebreaking, and said to
the court:

"Your Honor, I submit that my client did not break into the house at
all.  He found the parlor window open and merely inserted his right
arm and removed a few trifling articles.  Now, my client's arm is not
himself, and I fail to see how you can punish the whole individual
for an offense committed by only one of his limbs."

"That argument," said the judge, "is very well put.  Following it
logically, I sentence the defendant's arm to one year's imprisonment.
He can accompany it or not, as he chooses."

The defendant smiled, and with his lawyer's assistance unscrewed his
cork arm, and, leaving it in the dock, walked out.



_The Old Man Knew Best_

"I took three bottles of your medicine, and I feel like a new woman,"
read the testimonial.  "John," she said in a shrill, piping voice, "I
think this is exactly what I need.  I have been feeling bad for quite
a spell back, and the lady was symptomated just exactly as I feel.  I
believe I will try three bottles and see if it will make a new woman
out of me."

"Not much, Maria," said John, with tremendous earnestness.  "Not if I
know it.  I don't mind spending three dollars on you if you feel bad,
but I ain't a-goin' to have you made into any of these here new
women, gaddin' about the city to women's clubs and savin' the country
that don't need savin'.  You jest mix up some sulphur and molasses
and take it, and you will feel better, but don't let me hear no more
of this new-woman nonsense."



_Watch and Pray_

A pompous old Bishop was one morning breakfasting at a country inn
where it had been his lot to spend the night.  As he approached the
table he found at his place a fine trout well cooked and tempting.
He closed his eyes to say his grace before meat, not noticing a
Quaker gentleman seated opposite, who, with a mischievous smile,
reached over quickly and scooped the fish over to his own plate.

Having finished his prayer the Bishop opened his eyes and prepared to
enjoy the trout, but to his surprise and dismay it had disappeared.

The jolly Quaker, eying the Bishop, at the same time demolishing the
trout, said with feigned solemnity:

"Bishop, thee must 'watch and pray'--'watch and pray.'"



_No Doubt About That_

The fresh spring breezes were blowing through the open windows of the
schoolroom, and George Washington was the momentous question in hand.

"Why do you think George Washington was the first man?" asked the
teacher.

"Because he was 'first in war, first in peace, and first in the
hearts of his countrymen.'"

Another boy then raised his hand.

"Well, Johnny, who do you think was the first man?" said the teacher.

"Don't know his name," answered Johnny, "but I know George Washington
was not the first man, 'cause my history says he married a widow, so
there must have been a man ahead of him."



_All's Fair in Love_

A poor couple went to the priest for marriage, and were met with a
demand for the marriage fee.  It was not forthcoming.  Both the
consenting parties were rich in love and in their prospects, but
destitute of financial resources.  The father was obdurate.  "No
money, no marriage."

"Give me l'ave, your riverence," said the blushing bride, "to go and
get the money."

It was given, and she sped forth on the delicate mission of raising a
marriage fee out of pure nothing.  After a short interval she
returned with the sum of money, and the ceremony was completed to the
satisfaction of all.  When the parting was taking place the
newly-made wife seemed a tittle uneasy.

"Anything on your mind, Catherine ?" said the father.

"Well, your riverence, I would like to know if this marriage could
not be spoiled now."

"Certainly not, Catherine.  No man can put you asunder."

"Could you not do it yourself, father?  Could you not spoil the
marriage?"

"No, no, Catherine.  You are past me now.  I have nothing more to do
with your marriage."

"That aises me mind," said Catherine, "and God bless your riverence.
There's the ticket for your hat.  I picked it up in the lobby and
pawned it."



_An Addition to the Catechism_

An enterprising superintendent was engaged one Sunday in catechizing
the Sunday-school pupils, varying the usual method by beginning at
the end of the catechism.

After asking what were the prerequisites for the Holy Communion and
confirmation, and receiving satisfactory replies, he asked:

"And now, boys, tell me what must precede baptism?"

A lively urchin shouted out: "A baby, sir!"



_No Two Ways About It_

A colored preacher who had only a small share of this world's goods,
and whose salary was not forthcoming on several occasions, became
exasperated.  At his morning service he spoke to his church members
thusly:

"Bredern and sistern, things is not as should be.  You 'must not
'spects I can preach on u'th an' boa'd in Heben."



_The Maid Knew a Thing or Two_

"Madam," said the book-agent as the door was opened by a very comely
maid, "I am selling a new book on etiquette and deportment."

"Oh, you are," she responded.  "Go down there on the grass and clean
the mud off your feet."

"Yes'm," and he went.  "As I was saying, ma'am," he continued as he
again came to the door, "I am sell----"

"Take off your hat!  Never address a strange lady at her door without
removing your hat."

"Yes'm."  And off went the hat.  "Now, then, as I was saying----"

"Take your hands out of your pockets.  No gentleman ever carries his
hands there."

"Yes'm," and his hands clutched at his coat lapels.  "Now, ma'am,
this work on eti----"

"Throw out your cud.  If a gentleman uses tobacco he is careful not
to disgust others by the habit."

"Yes'm," and the tobacco disappeared.  "Now, ma'am," as he wiped his
brow, "in calling your attention to this valuable----"

"Wait.  Put that dirty handkerchief out of sight.  I don't want your
book.  I am only the hired girl.  You can come in, however, and talk
with the lady of the house.  She called me a liar this morning and I
think she needs something of the kind."



_Under Similar Conditions_

"Speaking of men falling in love and ardently pursuing the object of
their affections, you needn't make fun of any one, John.  You were
bound to have me, but you can't say I ever ran after you."

"Very true, Anastasia, the trap never runs after the rat, but it
gathers him in all the same."



_His First Move_

A bashful cowboy, returning from the plains to civilized society
after an absence of several years, fell desperately in love at first
sight with a pretty young girl whom he met at a party.

On leaving the house that evening the young lady forgot her
overshoes, and the hostess, who had noticed the Westerner's
infatuation, told the young Lochinvar that he might return them to
the girl if he wished.  The herder leaped at the chance and presented
himself in due time at the young lady's house.  She greeted him
cordially.

"You forgot your overshoes last night," he said, awkwardly handing
her the package.

"Why, there's only one overshoe here!" she exclaimed, as she thanked
him and opened it.

"Yes, Miss," said he, blushing.  "I'll bring the other one tomorrow.
Oh, how I wish that you were a centipede!" And with that he turned
and sped away down the street.



_His "Catch" Was Delayed_

Tommy went fishing the other day without his mother's permission.
The next morning one of his chums met him and asked: "Did you catch
anything yesterday, Tommy?"

"Not till I got home," was the rather sad response.



_Using His Friends_

A visitor from New York to the suburbs said to his host during the
afternoon:

"By-the-way, your front gate needs repairing.  It was all I could do
to get it open.  You ought to have it trimmed or greased or
something."

"Oh, no," replied the owner, "oh, no, that's all right."

"Why is it?" asked the visitor.

"Because," was the reply, "every one who comes through that gate
pumps two buckets of water into the tank on the roof."



_He Did--After That_

A young man who persisted in whispering loudly to the lady who
accompanied him to a symphony concert, telling her what the music
"meant," what sort of a passage was coming next, and so on, caused
serious annoyance to every one of his immediate neighbors.  Presently
he closed his eyes and said to his companion:

"Did you ever try listening to music with your eyes shut?  You've no
idea how lovely it sounds!"

Thereupon a gentleman who sat in the seat in front of the young man
twisted himself about and said gravely:

"Young man, did you ever try listening to music with your mouth shut?"






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Good Stories from The Ladies Home
Journal, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOOD STORIES ***

***** This file should be named 12836.txt or 12836.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/8/3/12836/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
